Right.
Mr. Edgecomb, you've been here with us.
Um, so we've got 10 minutes with us,
so hopefully we'll leave a little bit time with some
Questions. Yeah, yeah, no problem.
Um, thank you.
So I'd just like to reinforce the long history
that the New Zealand antique
and Historical Arms has had in providing input when it comes
to arms Act changes and amendments.
Now we have an association have been able
to positively contribute to the arms legislation
and regulation over the last 60 years,
active participants in, uh,
firearms Community Advisory Forum.
And we provide feedback and advice to FSA and police
whenever we have been, have had an opportunity to do so.
Uh, we, and we must reinforce that we share the common ideal
that public safety is paramount.
Uh, owning firearms
and being licensed should be seen as an opportunity
for the firearms community to work positively
with regulators and administrators.
Yet all too often we have unfortunately been scapegoated
and, uh, persecuted and made to feel the enemy since 2019.
And the erosion of trust in police has been, uh,
disheartening to see as for legislation to be effective,
a positive partnership between the regulator
and the regulated is, uh, is paramount.
So, points from out from the submission we,
I mentioned magazines,
and you've got the proposed introduction
of prohibited pistol magazines.
And the outline process for management
of these magazines ought to be employed
for all prohibited magazines
as the prohibited pistol magazine control measures are
practical and workable.
Um, they're actually really good
and, uh, would move, remove a heck of a lot
of administrative burden on the regulator, uh,
and on the, uh, the end users when it comes to the magazines
for pistols and restricted weapons.
And you have to bear in mind that the, the majority
of the restricted firearms that we have
a prohibitive magazine for, we aren't allowed to use them
'cause they collective items and, uh, provisions
of the collector's endorsement does not allow the use
of the firearm unless you, uh, a reenactor, et cetera,
which is another kettle official together.
So, uh, rather than having to serialize
and record individual magazines,
having the appropriate license for the firearm that takes
that magazine or even a separate endorsement
for the magazine, should be sufficient for the ownership.
This would also enhance public safety
because it would allow magazines from the gray market
to come back into legitimacy without
the administrative burden.
And in fact, at the moment, it's virtually impossible
to register a magazine that you find that's slipped
through the cracks and hasn't been registered.
And being honest about it, there's probably thousands
of 'em out there, and there will be for a long time.
They should be in appropriate hands, stored appropriately
and, uh, you know, with persons make it easy.
Uh, so this sort of goes into the registration
of gray market items.
That is a major issue. There's
a heck of a lot of stuff out there.
Uh, here, example, in the last week I've had,
I've personally submitted three pistols for registration,
which have sort of come from a family in the Hawke's Bay.
The guy that sub that found them, the collector
that found them and uh, tried to get them registered,
could not get them registered anywhere in his location.
He couldn't find a dealer that would handle them
or a dealer with the appropriate endorsements.
So he rang me and said, what do I do? Get them to me?
So he got 'em to me and I now
submitted those for registration.
Why? Why couldn't he get,
Because no dealer would handle them
because they didn't have the appropriate endorsements
and they just could not be bothered.
And he'd asked a few people, this is a sort of a,
it's a real niche market thing
and you average, your average dealer's not interested.
So were there,
were there oversights magazines or No, no. This is
Pistols that he pistol pistols that he got from a family.
The World War II bring backs never been
registered. Yeah. And,
And, but they couldn't be bothered.
They couldn't be bothered. The, like dealers in his area
weren't appropriately endorsed
or they just weren't interested.
Wow. So he came to me and I, I've done it for him.
I've also had a, um,
a military style semi-automatic rifle turn up outta the
woodwork from a deceased estate.
Um, the guy that had it, it was a Vietnam bring back
and he's had it since it came back in about 1974.
Um, I've, I have presented it for registration.
And uh, tomorrow I have to surrender it to police so
that they can conduct investigations and make, flip a coin
and decide whether they'll let us, uh, register or not.
Why do they have to get a cop?
Why do they have to have it physically?
Exactly. They can work out whether an AK
47 or whatever works or
Not. Exactly. It's,
it's ridiculous.
And it's probably better in the,
it's probably better retained in my security than sitting in
the local police station, but we won't go there.
That's the current legislation, hence.
So I sort of suggest that we need
to have a very well defined
and easy path for registration of Gray Market Farms.
'cause it is a massive public safety enhancement to be able
to bring that stuff in, that sort of gear gravitates
to collectors and maybe pistol shooters are definitely
endorsed license holders
because people know that that's what we're into.
And, uh, you know, we wanna be compliant,
but we wanna be compliant without the hassle.
Yeah. We wanna be able to do it without the fear of being,
you know, made out to be criminals.
And quite often we have to pay for these items
that pop up outta the woodwork
'cause they don't come up, come to us for free.
So we're actually putting money on the table
to get these things and to bring them into legitimacy.
And the current state of affairs is that we may not get it.
So what's your solution to, um, making it easier
to register to gray mate, uh,
unregistered rifle pistol previously to No,
It's very simple at the moment. Pistols
are, are, they aren't a problem.
I can register, I can get a machine gun
and register easier than I can a semi-automatic,
but that's, yeah.
So all, basically all it is,
is the arms officer will have a quick look on the national
intelligence application
or near, see if the serial number pops up as being stolen or
otherwise, if it's an issue, well
that's great if it's been stolen, yeah,
happy happily surrender it.
But I've seen them do it.
I've been present when it's been done.
It's about a 15 minute exercise if that.
And, uh, well they've gotta do is put it into your name.
Okay. Quite, quite simple, uh,
dealer's licenses.
I see. They're sort of wanting business
registration for dealers.
Uh, I've sort of looked at that a bit.
I, I maintain a dealer's license. I don't have a shop.
I run an auction
and I run a gun show for the antique arms in Taranaki.
Hence I have the dealer's license.
I might transact three
or 400 firearms a year through the auction.
Um, but I'm not a retailer as such.
I'm doing this on behalf of the club.
And it sort of says, it seems to, I seem to see
that I might may need a business license
to continue to provide that service.
Um, there are a number of small dealers such as myself
that are providing a service to the wider
firearms community.
The, the pistols I just mentioned being registered as one
of those services that, that we provide.
And without the specialized dealers,
it's gonna be quite hard for that to facilitate.
Is it that difficult to become registered as a business?
Well, I I don't do it as a business
and I think the threshold's about
$60,000 turnover or something. And so
Then what happens if, so are you saying there's a gap
between hunting, fishing, selling, whole lot of rifles, uh,
and you're selling 300? Well,
Yeah, I'm selling 300 on behalf
of other people through an auction.
So at the moment you're unlicensed,
I'm a dealer. I, I
I am a licensed
Dealer. You're licensed, but,
and every, every, um, pistol rifle has
to be registered as a transaction.
Absolutely, yes. But,
but this piece of legislation now requires you
to go and get a business license.
Is it? I I get that impression. Um, attention.
I may be wrong, but it sort of seems to read that way.
I mean, if that's the case, I'll do it,
but it's just making it harder for, for guys
that are there providing services.
We also have dealers that are providing gunsmithing services
because they need the dealer's license
to transact some pieces and
Well, we'll ask that point.
So I think what we want is some, some recognition
that the, the smaller dealers actually do contribute a half
of a lot rather than the, the big retailers. Yeah.
Um, cool. That's a good point. Okay.
Um, so license conditions, the carriage
of like z Zach touched on this with his you
Can't carry it. Yeah,
Well, yeah. And
so prior to 92
in our Red, red Firearms license book, if you remember
that we had a little page stuck in the back,
which had these, uh, the endorsement
and it had the conditions of the endorsement
and you could carry them for sale, trade,
exhibition, whatever.
And that's Cole. So when the license cards came in in,
in 93, there was no room on the card for the conditions.
So they didn't have the conditions,
but they honored the conditions.
And, uh, if you actually look at the,
the current police arms manual,
those conditions are still stipulated in there.
But there has been a little bit of, uh, noise around trying
to reintroduce something from the 59 Act,
which was a license to carry.
So if I, if this, if, if this came about for me to go
to a gun show, or for someone to go to a gun show
and say, take 10 restricted firearms along to a gun show
for display, they'd have to have a license to do that,
which would come at a cost.
And, uh, I think that the, the conditions of the, uh,
of the license should be honored,
and it should be in legislation
because it's practical stuff.
It just allows us to, you know, we will take our firearms
to a gun show, they'll, the gun shows are all legitimate.
There's security requirements,
there's all sorts of things that we comply with.
That's not an issue. Uh, pistol shooters take their pistols
to the range that's, um, one of their license conditions.
Um, collectors may go along and do a display at Anzac Day.
And, uh, quite often we do, I'm quite often asked
to do an ANZAC display, and I do.
And it's a just a, it's a community service.
Uh, there's a whole raft of reasons why we should be able
to carry them for, for legitimate purposes being
sale, trade display.
Yeah. You know, not just, you're not going
around town like a cowboy with 'em.
Yeah. You have a legitimate purpose.
So I'd like, I would very much like to see that, uh,
those conditions were in legislation, uh,
legisl, the other thing we sort of have a bit
of an issue is, okay, there's a lot of opinion
and, uh, informed expert or
otherwise, um, some of the organizations that,
that you know, that, that have come forward, uh,
expressing these opinions
and, uh, trying to offering them as, as,
as an expert opinion in the absence of real expertise,
I would ask the committee to carefully consider that they,
who they will consult with as the Arms Act needs realistic
and balanced feedback
and input based on real world experience in, in the, uh,
you know, the, to be used as used as a foundation
for your legislation though, um, I think
you need to get it from the people that are,
that are heavily involved with it.
Yes, I do understand there needs to be some balance. Yeah.
But you need to be careful about getting the right
information because this has to work.
Yeah. We all want it to work.
And, uh, I guess, you know, it comes down to sort of,
we'd like to acknowledge that the efforts, a lot
of effort's being put in, um, by the select committee
and, uh, you know, thanks
for allowing us to come along and present.
And I'd also like to say that, um, I've had a bit
of input into the coal flow submission.
I've read the submission in detail
and, uh, yeah, I think it, it is pretty good, but, alright.
Hey, thank you questions? No, we've run
Outta time. Okay. Can I have a
Quick question chair?
I have one. Okay. For Mr. Ka Bakes from Nui.
Thanks very much. Um, thanks for the submission
and thanks for, um, what you do in terms of the Anzac Day,
um, show presentations
and the like for that, um, requirement of the license.
Do you think that at the outset, the, um,
license holders should indicate that they want
that condition, uh, to be able to take the gun shows?
Or do you think that it should be for all, um,
license holders for the, for the antique guns?
I think Carl, it should, it should be a reflection that
of all that hold a collectors endorsement or a b endorsement
because it's part and parcel of what we do.
And, uh, one more thing, Jay, I think, uh,
you're the MP in my area.
You're welcome to come and have a visit
and have a look at, um, what a collection's
all about if you're, if you're curious.
Yeah. I've seen one of your public displays before,
but happy to come along and have a look.
Yep. No, look me up mate.
Cool. Okay. Right now we've got, thank you very much.
Thank you for that submission. Very good.
Yeah, we've got New Zealand Game Council.
Oh, you have multiple hats.
I don't like downtime. Have you got, may I ask,
have you got geese on your, are they
Totally Appropriate? Right?
Yeah, I know. I thought so.
I was looking at it before. Boots and pink game birds.
Yeah, they look very nice. Thank you. Right.
Your floor is yours. 10 minutes
Kda. Thank you for the opportunity
to come
and, um, speak to you this afternoon.
My name's Rinna Jordan. I'm the CEO
of the Game Manual Council
and yes, so also CEO of Fish and Game.
And I spoke to you this morning, um,
and I have Mark hug beside me.
Uh, this is actually my first day on the job,
so it's a baptism by fire,
but I think it speaks to the importance
of the Arms bill and getting it right.
Um, passion.
Also a member of the New Zealand, uh,
10th Focus Association, um, passionate Dear Stalker
that needs to use our firearms
and tools to put meat on the table.
Okay, cool. The Gay Men Council was a,
is a statutory organization.
It's fairly new, established in 2013,
and it's got core functions.
I've set those out in the submission.
But the ones I think that are the most relevant is
that we advise the minister on the sustainable management
of game animals.
We also, uh, work across the hunting sector.
And when I talk about the hunting sector,
I'm not e I'm not just talking about recreational hunters,
but I'm talking about the Professional Guides Association
Outfitters, um, our, our, uh, professional hunting, um,
institutes such as Waro, um,
and all the rest of them as well.
So it's a, it's a really large industry
and we liaise with the Department of Conservation
and private landowners on game
animal management and hunting.
And we work really closely with the firearm safety authority
and promoting firearm safety across our
hunting sector as well.
Uh, we also develop guidelines on standards for hunting, um,
gay men management and for the associations.
So hunting is an integral part of New Zealand's identity.
It's weaving together our cultural heritage
and the stewardship of our, our natural resources.
We've got over about 160,000, uh, hunters in New Zealand.
They're involved annually in some form of hunting.
I think it's around about 220,000 licensed
firearms owners in New Zealand.
But concerningly, that number is dropping.
The sector plays an important role in the management
of game animals and the control
of pest species across both private and public land.
In New Zealand, we harvest more than 350,000 big game
animals annually, including deer.
And this exceeds their current government operations such
as NPI or the Department of Conservation.
So we are a strong tool,
not any in supporting our rural communities.
Um, gay mental management and peace management,
but also, uh, uh, vital in relation to some
of our lower socioeconomic communities as well.
We bring millions into regional economies,
especially in remote areas
with limited alternative income sources.
We spend approximately 300 million Alan annually on hunting
related expenses and the guiding hunting sector.
And Rogers behind me is gonna be presenting in a minute.
They employ more than around about 300, uh,
530 people, sorry.
And they generate over 218 million in annual foreign sales.
So important for the economy of the country as well.
We're here to you today to talk about firearms
and ensuring that the regulations go through so
that they reduce or restrict or,
or, um, manage criminal activity, um,
but also in a way that supports law abiding citizens
to use the tool for recreational and hunting
and community pursuits.
Uh, there's just a couple of parts of the submission
that I'm gonna turn your mind to
and then I'll pause for questions.
So the first one is a power 25.
I just wanna elaborate a little bit on this.
So the GAC considers that the definition of animal
and biosecurity controller is a little bit restricted,
does not adequately accommodate the range
of animal management and control activities required
to meet conservation and gain animal management objectives.
Think about Canada geese and some parts of New Zealand.
We've got significant deer management issues as well.
Of course, public agencies
and land managers are increasingly reliant on coordinated
management animal control programs.
Yet current and proposed rectory settings limit the
involvement of suitably experienced civilian hunters
with the skills, knowledge
and safety record to contribute effectively
what we're seeing at the moment is the growing emergence
of recreational coordinated management hunts.
They generally facilitated through the likes
of the Department of Conservation,
and they're an increasingly used tool, at least cost
to the taxpayer to, uh, manage some of these, um, areas
of New Zealand where we have growing, um,
challenges in relation to our game animals.
Uh, another part of the sector that's really important is
to supporting juniors to come into becoming safe
and legitimate licensed firearms owners.
And so we're looking for changes to the bill,
which enable those pathways for our, for our juniors
to come into being legitimate hunters.
Often those pathways are through our clubs or rangers
and also through the likes of NZDA.
So we're supporting changes that enable unlicensed hunters
to, uh, act under the direct su supervision
of a licensed firearm, um, owner
and specific changes in relation to that as well.
And then the last part is, um, just a, a pledge
or a plea to keep the cost down.
So while we need to be able to cover the costs
of managing the system, we need the system to not be
so bureaucratic that the costs exceed the opportunity
or the ability for a common New Zealand to be able
to hire a firearms
and be able to legitimately utilize it as a tool
for hunting purposes and other endeavors.
Very good. Right.
Um, so the
business activity, you didn't talk about a limit
of six rifles or guns.
Mm-hmm. Um, I presume you don't want
to have a limit because in your case you'd say
that you often have more than six clients,
but in many cases we've heard previously there shouldn't,
uh, many people have many different rifles
or So is that your view or not?
I don't see the need to have a limit in relation
to a business or an agency.
Um, with part of that business
or agency is to manage firearms.
Uh, for example, when we gave the example this morning, fish
and game is part of our, uh, wildlife functions, um,
undertake compliance activities.
We will seize and hold firearms for a period
of time within our premises.
Did you hear me? Yes. Right. Scott, uh, Willis.
Thank you Corina. Nice to meet you, mark.
Um, so you've said that you support the appointment
of a member of the Game Animal Council
to the Firearms Licensing Review Committee.
Would you also support for a bit
of balance someone from Gun Control
New Zealand? For example?
Our view is that you should have the sufficient expertise
and skills available on the committees
and the forums to be able to provide really sound advice
for legitimate firearms management ownership and use.
So yes, um, we actually had a, a provision within here
where we were saying as part of MAG
or the other forums, to make sure
that they did have the suit suitably qualified,
experienced people within on those forums
to be able to provide that advice
Merit based suppose.
Yeah. Um, I just had a quick one on, sorry. Do you have
Another? I've got another,
Yeah, I have a second.
And, um, I note that you support licensing from 16 years.
I'm a, you know, I'm one of those, I got mine at 16
and been a few years now, not that many.
Um, what about the concept of a learner license?
And we've heard the value of mentoring.
Would that, is that something that you,
you would support a learner license through to say 18,
where you, you make sure that there's, that
that good mentoring and discipline
and care that, that we know is so important for,
for the privilege, the privilege of owning a firearm?
I think our position is to, um,
reduce barriers while not reducing to them, to the point
where we're not controlling that criminal
element in our community.
So I, I haven't, I haven't had that proposition in front
of me to be able to give it sufficient, um, consideration.
Okay. Um, Mr. Title C
Just a quick one on, um, the visitor licensing,
the paragraph 39.
Um, obviously at the moment as the bill's drafted, um,
a visitor obviously probably coming here for shooting
or for competition, whatever the reason might be.
Now looking at that, um, have a 12 month period,
do you think that is long enough
or could it be,
I think another submission talked about two years?
Or do you think there could be?
Yeah, I'll just get your view on the period of 12 months.
Uh, I think we submitted sort of a, in support
that it should be extended to sort
of like a 12 month period.
I don't see any reason why you wouldn't extend it longer if
there were legitimate controls
and balances within that system, uh, to manage
that individual and make sure they're a fit
and proper person in relation to, um,
utilizing firearms in New Zealand.
I think the Guides association has,
has really strong views in, in relation
to international hunters coming over
and hunting in New Zealand.
There might be exemptions, for example, if they were working
with a professional guide that was part
of an association. Thanks.
Right. Good. I think, um, we're outta time,
but thank you for that great submission.
There are very good points in here. Right.
And I think just, um, moving on to
that same question, uh, Mr.
Duxford field, uh,
from the New Zealand Professional Hunting Guides
Association, you don't look like a professional guide
or dressed up like that, if I may say so, but
Well, sometimes you have to do these things. Very
Professional, I Would've thought. Very professional,
Just off the plane from, from the states, so it's Oh, very
Good. Thank you. Thank
you for coming.
Um, so, uh, yeah, I'll just, uh, quickly take it
as our submission is red.
I, i just for the purposes, others, um, we represent, uh,
over 80 guided hunting businesses, all sides, all sizes
and over 50 guides.
Uh, on top of that who work for these businesses, uh,
generates about 280 million revenue a year.
Uh, that was a November, 2025 audit
and all these money stay in New Zealand.
Um, so we, we, I would just like to make,
um, some added points on the, uh, on,
on the various things I've raised.
We've raised, um, visitor licensing.
Uh, we implored the changes, um,
and I I will have it as, uh, taken as read
what we've put there, but probably given
it some bit more thought.
And we also feel that, uh, visitor should be able
to sell a firearm as it's already entered into the registry.
So we support not being able to buy a firearm,
but to also sell a firearm.
And for some of the reasons I've put in our, our, um,
submission here around, uh, uh, uh,
the difficulty sometimes people have in taking, uh,
firearms outta the country and,
and dealing with it right on the matter.
Two, um, uh, regarding, uh, game estate and, uh,
and the, the, uh, control of surplus animals on game estates
with, uh, autoloaders and that sort of thing.
Uh, an extension to this issue
that we've raised is getting rid of, uh,
worn out semi-automatic firearms
and replacing with newer ones
rather than importing new firearms,
we feel is a reasonable supply
of these semi-autos still exist in the country.
Uh, at the finish of the firearms buyback schemes, it came,
became apparent there was still a significant number of, uh,
semi-automatic firearms in circulation.
Uh, and this can be drawn, A conclusion can be drawn
by the difference in numbers of semi-auto firearms imported
to the, uh, previous years to what was actually handed in.
Some have held them onto them in hope
that this rewritten arms bill would allow them
to continue sports shooting and the like.
Others have had restricted firearms brought home from
overseas deployments who have heard in the past, um,
and by previous generations.
Uh, we wanna propose that a firearm of any sort
should be able to be handed into a firearm business
with no questions asked.
IE um, as the previous one of the previous s put.
And the business would immediately register that firearm
and then the business would have the choice of on selling
that firearm to an appropriate licensed holder
or receiving a predetermined amount from the regulator,
the firearm safety authorities.
Um, and these firearms could then,
if there were surplus, the dealer's requirements would go on
to be destroyed
or whatever, uh, by, you know, police or whatever.
Um, it would make it easy
for unlicensed people winding up estates
or persons holding a restricted firearm without the
appropriate licenses to submit, uh,
to submit these firearms without fear of prosecution
and get them out of circulation.
Now is the opportunity to include this kind
of proposal in the bill and craft the appropriate ledge?
Uh, there needs to be provisions in the bill
to allow unlicensed citizens who are caught
by police taking firearms to a firearms business
with the express pur purpose of handing them in, uh, to,
to waiver any firearms related charges that would arise.
But parallel to this is the ability to take an unregistered,
unwarranted vehicle to a testing station, uh,
or facility with the express purpose of making it legal
to drive in our roads.
So it's, it's sort of, um, there's AOP option
to waiver by police there.
Uh, the initial funding for this could
come from the unused funds.
The A CC contributed to the buyback scheme
and its goal of keeping New Zealand safe.
What monetary value that would be offered
for each handed in firearm
to the business owner could be on a fixed sliding scale
rather than to value.
Um, you know, a rusty old bolt action might only be eligible
for a hundred dollars, uh, support from the, uh, regulator.
Um, whereas an auto loader could be a couple of thousand,
um, and the dealer should, could be able to sell
that auto loader on, uh, for a significantly more
to a licensed user.
Um, this would be a win for the regulator
by being cost effective way
of taking unwanted firearms outta circulation wind
for the pest controllers wanted to upgrade,
replace born firearms.
Um, so that, that sort of covers that piece off.
And then I'll go on to, uh, number three, which,
and our thing was regarding fit and proper people.
And, uh, we feel that it needs, it needs to ensure
that the fit and proper person assessment requirements are
appropriately written into the act in such a way
that they're unable to be interpreted by the regulator.
So, so that it, we feel it needs to be defined better
and the when the bill does appropriately.
Um, on question four, with, uh, with regards to
that, we covered off, um, uh, the, uh, problems
with illegal hunting our industry faces.
And, um, it,
the act should treat all illegal hunting activities
and offense under the arms act IE rev revocation
and forfeiture becomes an appropriate process.
Um, the for, uh, forfeiture process should extend well
beyond the firearms as many of the people
that participate in this activity, uh, often unlicensed.
So it, um, there has to be a wider scope there.
Um, with number five, um, we, we,
you briefly cut, uh, touched on about it was, um,
at the current legislation allows for outfitters
to only hire out six firearms.
Uh, we are finding that a little bit constrained
and we are look seeking to have, uh, increased to 10
because many operators have more than
that number of people turn up.
And the reason why this is in the ledge is
because, uh, the current ledge requires, uh, you
to have a dealer's license if you are going
to hire out any firearms.
So this was a dispensation to this industry
and it's just a bit tight
'cause quite a few people have had to get, um,
dealer's licenses as a result.
Um, and then, uh, we, we talked about the costings
and uh, um,
the act should reflect the public good component
of keeping New Zealand safe
and pastry, which in turn, um,
should give the minister
and the regulator steer on what level of cost recovery is
Appropriate for the license.
Let's hold it. Let's go some questions. I think, oh, sorry.
We run outta time. Yep. I just, it's a good submission.
So that's, uh,
Thanks very much, chair.
Um, and thanks Roger for the submission.
You talk about the visitor visa right up the front
of your submission and you talk about, um, visitors
that may want to come in March and then come back in May.
Yes. One of the questions that we've raised is whether, um,
the visitors may one year want to come in March
and the next year want to come in May,
which would obviously be longer than a year.
And whether that 12 months should be, uh,
slightly longer than a year to allow for those,
that might come at slightly different times at the end
of each of that 12 month period.
Have you got any thoughts about that?
Um, only that if you put the regulator's hat on, um,
those, that person's, um,
situation could change quite a bit
internationally in 12 months.
And so I, I think you've gotta balance things up.
So do you think twelve's appropriate?
I, I think twelve's appropriate. Um, okay, cool.
That's good. Good advice.
Good. Thanks for feedback. Can, um, any other,
can I just ask, um, you seem to,
you're the only person tried to deal with this issue.
There's vast amount of unregistered firearms and I remember
because I sat on the original committee,
all these issues came before.
Yeah. And, um,
so all the stories about people putting tubes in the ground
and storing them.
So your, your proposal is
that if I have an unregistered firearm at the moment,
if I front up to say the regulator
or police I'm, they're gonna ask searching questions.
Mm-hmm. So not no incentive. No, none at all.
Um, and particularly when you're not wound
up with states or whatever.
Yes. So you, what you're proposing is that you,
the mechanism to get it to the, to get approved must go
to a dealer first.
Is that the first step? That is the first step
because we have, and that's on a no no inquiring basis.
That's correct. Either. And then someone can then check
whether it's stolen, but it doesn't matter if it's stolen
or not because it gets returned.
Yes. So that,
but that is on a basis of no incrimination at that point.
Yep. Sounds like American, um, system.
Um, and then that dealer then would have the opportunity
to go to the regulator
and say, here, I've got this firearm, it's whatever.
And so then they,
presumably they would do the check, but it's been stolen.
Yes. If, and if it's not been stolen,
it would be at the option of the dealer to sell it
or, um, the recompense bit.
How does that work? Uh, the, um, to attract the,
these firearms in, um, you, the dealer would be able to,
uh, pay out, uh, a predetermined amount
for a certain type of firearm.
And uh, and that way the, uh,
You've got government money going out
through a private individual.
It, it could, it could be like that, yes.
But it, it would be a way of getting, uh, these firearms out
of the system without, um,
Because as soon as you nominate who you're paying it to,
then it becomes clear where it's come from.
Yes. That's the incrimination stuff. Yeah.
Um, not sure it quite works, but I like the concept of it.
How many have you, because I remember when,
and I'm going back years,
but, um, there were talks
of well over 160,000 I think from memory of that's probably
what, 250,000 of unregistered firearms?
I dunno what the fee is now.
Well, there was significant number,
I won't use the numbers, but, um, you,
you're on pa on the line there and,
but were the, um,
number handed in was significantly
less than what was important here.
Yeah. So just a supplement
Actually. Yeah.
Yeah. So you've also suggested that in that buyback scheme
that we might have pest control wanting to swap out old,
old, old rifles, old semi-automatics and,
and purchasing a new one and that, that handed in
and get paid out for handing It is
Not necessarily, no, not necessarily.
No. It's, um, the incentive to, uh, would be, um,
that would be worked out in the fine print,
but basically, uh, it, it would be for firearms
that wouldn't normally come out of the, uh, system.
Yeah, probably. I'm just thinking it through.
You probably wouldn't do it for monetary compensation
because they've MSCs and all that sort of stuff.
Anyway. Hey, look, that has been very helpful.
Um, six to 10, which is very, uh,
clear in 12 months is very good.
Alright. Good clarity. Thank you very much for that.
Okay, thank you. Right now, um, we're on to, we're news
the World War II historical Reenactment Society.
You've been very patient this morning.
Yeah. Do you go all around the country?
Uh, yes. Very good. Okay.
We've got 10 minutes with you.
Thank you. So, uh, my name's Daniel Child
and I'm representing the World War II
Historical Reenactment Society.
So, um, we're at the forefront of historical, um,
military reenacting in New Zealand since we were
formed 30 years ago.
Um, so you know what reenacting is?
We wear period uniforms
and represent New Zealand at things like Anzac Day
and public events, um, and films and documentaries.
And we often display, uh, firearms
and military at these events.
We perform scripted, uh, theatrical battles using
military vehicles, firearms, pyrotechnics,
and we educate the public, um,
on our country's military history and heritage.
So we raised some, uh, points in, in our submission that,
our written submission that I'm just, uh, going to speak to.
Yeah. Um, so points, uh, one and,
and five essentially the same.
And that is, uh, the the sheer number of endorsements. Yeah.
Um, that overlap.
Um, magazines, uh, been one of them.
Uh, if you have a restricted firearm,
you also have a separate endorsement
for the magazine that goes in it.
It's just an overlapping thing.
Um, I myself have between nine and 14
or more endorsements. What,
And can you just give us a view on what that means?
So, um, so you get your standard firearms license Yeah.
Then you'll get an endorsement if you, uh, need to
or wish to own pro, uh, prohibited
or restricted firearms pistols. Yeah,
I know what, what some of the examples.
So yes. So I have a collective's
endorsement for a prohibited firearm.
Right. I also have a living history endorsement
for the same thing and
theatrical endorsement for the same thing.
And the same three endorsements for magazines,
the same for pistols The same.
And you just pay a fee for each one?
Yes. What do you pay a year in endorsements?
Um, it's not a year.
It's a, the endorsement applies for 10 years when you Yeah.
When you apply. But at the moment, um,
when you do your license, your endorsement,
the fee covers whether you are applying
for one or, or multiple.
Yeah. But the proposed cost changes in the future
are looking at an enormous amount per endorsement.
And a lot of these endorsements just overlap. Yeah. Okay.
Um, so, uh, and theatrical armor is another one.
Um, there's, uh,
four different theatrical armor endorsements.
Not none of 'em really fit for purpose,
but that's what there is.
Um, and example I we, four of them.
Um, so there's a lot of bit
that could be cleared up there.
Cool. Um, so 0.2 on our submission is the,
the carriage display
and use of, of, um, these arms items
that at the theatrical
and collector shows events and activities.
Um, we know from experience how, how the
regulations, how variable they can be interpreted
depending on who you're dealing with.
And we aren't covered, um, for what we do, uh, being able
to carry them specifically.
And, and, um, so because
It's all world two reenactments
and not specifically notified,
No, I'm not meaning, I'm just meaning as a collector
or a living historian, which is another endorsement,
there's nothing in the legislation that says
that we are allowed to, to carry a fire
and other past that there our curtilage. So
You're illegal. You're illegal
every time you go to
The shop. Well, as, um, Andrew
just pointed out,
it's a similar sort of thing.
It's this, this, um, gray area. It's unclear.
Unclear. Right. Unclear.
And we'd like to see it in legislation that we are allowed
to take these Yeah.
Things if we are licensed to do it to events and,
and things like that, rather than it being left up
to the regulator to interpret the legislation
and provide the guidelines.
That's what we're asking for. Yep.
Um, briefly on the point with regards
to blank fire firearms, um, we uh, mentioned there
that we think, uh, uh, section 2 5 1 covers that
and having to have a separate endorsement, uh,
a firearms license for a blank,
a manufactured blank fire gun.
The reason that we have people that use them is
because they, they cannot, um, get a firearms license.
Not that they are not allowed to,
they just aren't in a circumstance to be able to,
they might be flatting, they might have poor eyesight
or some medical condition so
that they feel it's better that they don't do that.
Um, this, so
These things look like a real lifeguard.
Yes. They, they, they look,
but they, they can, they only, only
But people use in robbery
and you wouldn't know the difference
That, but that would be criminal misuse.
And that's covered under 2 5 1 section 2 5 1.
So how does that, so how,
So, so what section 16.1 is doing the same?
All blank firearms should fall under the category we at the
same as firearms where you need a license?
Yeah. So you support endorsements for a blank?
No, no. What I'm saying is that, that the, we don't think
that needs to be the case.
We think that blank firearms are already covered under,
if you use them criminally.
Alright. If you misuse them criminally.
So therefore this is just gonna capture a lot of other stuff
that, that, that is a is irrelevant.
Uh, it it is, it's too broader. Okay.
Um, uh, so 0.4,
um, which is to do with infringement notices.
So when this comes in, there's a lot of new rules
and a lot of new interpretations
and people need to learn what they are and how, how
and, uh, we think that, um, we,
we'd rather see education over enforcement and,
and we, um, we've seen that the FSA tends
to favor enforcement over education too often.
And we, we'd like, uh,
and that's why we don't think infringement notices, uh,
a fines are a good idea.
I think that's just, um, taking it too far. Okay.
But there's one other point that, that we
didn't put in our submission that I would like to talk to,
which is the notification
to police when we put these events on.
So, um, we put 'em on all over the country
and when we do, we have to approach the local arms officer
who has never heard of us
or what we do, they get confused, they go upstairs.
Um, and it starts a long, protracted, um, process.
Uh, when there's only a limited number
of theatrical armors in New Zealand.
We would rather be able to, if go back
to either the old system we had with the police
or if it's insisted that we go to this permit process,
that we have someone in the FSA that we can deal with
who understands what we do
because we are doing the same thing all the time,
but we're dealing with people who different people.
Yeah. And it, and it, we're all volunteers
and it becomes a long, protracted process.
So that's, that, that's one of the things that,
that we would like to see change,
to provide some consistency and,
and not leave it up to the interpretation
of the local arms officer
who is quite often out of their depth in that.
Cool. Uh, any
Question? Right? Any
questions? No. Super helpful. No.
Hey, very helpful actually.
And it's great to go through that.
Um, particularly when you start, go
through the detail of that, it's really good.
Yes. Because we are often displaying prohibited
what are considered prohibited and restrictive firearms
and we're using them, um,
and at in mock battle scenes in public.
Um, so there's a process that we go through.
It's been, we've, we've done it for 30 years.
It's, it's been well liked by the public and, and,
and a safe thing and we don't wanna see it.
Um, essentially gone through legislation. Yeah.
Um, that's, that's poorly worded
and we would like to have a bit more involvement
as the actual armors with, um, that consenting process.
Okay. Thank you very much for your time.
Right now we're moving on.
We're not gonna have the Southern Lakes, uh, part
of the New Zealand Deer Stalkers Association.
That's pity. Um,
but we are gonna have the New Zealand Law Society by Zoom.
Alright. Good afternoon.
Hello. Are you on your own
or I had another name as well. Professor.
Um, Chris. Chris Macklan appears not to have joined us
yet, but, um, I would very happy to start, start.
Are you happy professor? Start? You're okay. Cool.
Well, the, um, my name's Jeremy Finn.
I'm a member
of the Law Society New Zealand Law
Society Criminal Law Committee.
Chris Macklin, who will be joining me,
I hope is chair of that committee.
But we agreed I'd start.
We're very aware that, um, the opportunity to present
to you is very valuable, that your time is limited
and we've given you a very long written submission,
so we don't want to troll you right the way through it.
Um, I will deal with,
firstly wanna mention some issues about drafting of the bill
and, uh, invite the committee to take further advice on
a number of the professions.
The second major issue that we want to look at is, uh, the
question of whether onus is placed on a defendant should be
evidential ons or legal ons.
Um, and we think that the, a number of places in the bill,
the, uh, probably is too, um,
it, it is unnecessary to place a legal onus
and then evidential onus would be equally effective.
Chris Maclin will talk to that.
And then, um, I'll come back
and I want to talk to you about the Bill of Rights Act,
issues that arise
and the, um, interpretation that
should be given to, um, provisions which
infringe on Bill of Rights Act rights in the light
of the Supreme Court decision in
Chisel and the Attorney General.
Yeah. Which is not mentioned as far
as we can see in the advice the committee has received
from Crown Law.
Um, possibly because this, um,
judgment came out more recently.
So on the drafting issue, we have identified, um, a number
of provisions which are problematic.
That is, um,
however balanced to a large extent by the fact
that there's been some very good drafting of the, uh,
older provisions in the ARMS Act
that were in quite obscure language.
And there's been a very good rewrite,
however, where the committee is dealing
or whether the legislation is dealing with new
and more complex, um, issues, there are times
where the drafting just doesn't seem to us to be effective
or to be the best of all.
And so, um, we would invite you to have a look at that.
Those are mostly listed at, um, paragraph seven 11 to 7 34
and we'd be happy to explore those with you if, um,
you have time and you, you wish to do that.
But I think it's more important perhaps that we move on
to the second and third issues.
And I see Chris has joined us. Yeah.
So Chris, will you discuss the legal
and evidential illnesses please?
Uh, yes, I will. And, and thank you for the introduction
and sorry to be late, um, to the committee.
Although on my defense, I think we're running quite early,
which is almost unheard.
We're, we're ripping along,
we're getting very good submissions.
Very good. Hey, well look, um,
hopefully I can continue along the very good lines.
Um, and just make a point
or draw out a point from our written submissions about the
onus being upon defendants for what are now proposed
to be some quite weighty offenses,
um, prescribed by the bill.
Um, they've been identified in the submissions, it's to do
with possession of firearms obviously.
And the Bill of rights advice the committee has is, hey,
these are reverse ons, but they're justified
because it should be a
Lost them Or the person
found in possession of firearm.
Sorry, Mr. M, Mr. Mr. Lan, sorry. You just cut out.
You froze and we were all poised
listening to you we're POed.
So you better just go back
and just say that last part about the onus come.
Sorry, just wanna to hear it.
Look, there's just a disproportion
that we're concerned about between the seriousness
of the offenses and the reversal of the onus.
Yeah. And The fact of the matter is
that we don't necessarily,
and with the utmost respect agree with the regulatory
analysis you have on the Bill of Rights point, that
it should be simple for somebody to prove
beyond reasonable doubt, their lawful possession.
Um, and there's a, a big concern too about that occupier
deeming provision, which is one carried over
Lost again.
Yeah.
Chris, you're frozen again. Maybe
If you're camera off.
Hey, um, Mr.
Macklan the suggestion, uh, turn your camera off.
He can hear me but may not be able to hear me this
Examination, especially if it's gonna
be read as imposing a legal
Burden. So it's
on the per, You're just cutting out.
Again, we are suggesting turn your camera off.
Might just give you, you must be,
your law firm must be running outta money or something. Ha
Mm-hmm. Um,
I'm a barrister soul, so I take that personally, Mr.
But no, no shortage of money. Uh, trust me.
All right. Sorry. Sorry Chris. Keep going.
The, is that better? Has that improved?
I mean, it certainly looks wise.
Yeah, we, we can hear you.
Excellent. Um, so the example I'll give just
to illustrate the point and then I'll back off given the
sound issues and
we're still cutting out, aren't we?
Yes. Yep. Yeah.
Um, perhaps Mr. Chair, I think I can take over.
Yeah, why don't you? Um,
the concern here is it is partly a matter of a sort
of technical distinction which lawyers
of criminal lawyers are familiar with between an evidential
and a legal onus.
Now, if something is alleged
and the prosecution have to prove, for instance, um,
unlawful possession of a firearm, then the, is
that the, um,
crown will prove it was in the physical possession.
And the question may be, did this person know
that the vehicle that the gun was say in their vehicle
or had somebody else put it there?
Now, if they have a legal onus,
and that is what is usually appearing in the bill,
they would have to show on the balance of probabilities
that they did not know that the gun was there.
IE they would have to show that somebody else put it there,
uh, to be, to be credible.
If it's only an evidential onus, then they would have
to show that there is some room for doubt that there, there,
there is, there is a doubt what we, we sort
of raise again a reasonable doubt,
which is obviously far less than the 50 50, um,
balance of probability.
Now in drug offenses, for example,
normally there will be only an evidential onus on a
defendant if it's alleged that they're in possession.
But the bill is putting legal ons to prove on the balance
of probabilities that the, um, that, that
the gun belonged to somebody else or whatever it may be.
And we suggest that
that's not appropriate given the
seriousness of the offenses.
It's common in offenses
that are called purely regulatory offenses.
Um, they may be dealing with safety in a workplace and so on
or, um, driving offenses, um, pollution offenses
that they have a person has to prove, um, on the balance
of probabilities, a lack of fault.
But that's not the case generally
for truly criminal offenses
and the penalties that are imposed
by the bill on the more serious offenses, we suggest
take them into the area where it would be
more appropriate for them to be evidential illnesses.
But what, just, just to cut to the chase,
'cause I think we all understand your point,
but uh, so you are, if you're traveling
with a rifle in your car Yep.
And we, we have one extreme from gang member who's got a
legal weapon in their car through to a good, um,
guide man who just spoke before, right.
Who's transporting an American tourist.
The first line
of defense if someone stopped you is your firearms license.
And you should have that on hand if you, uh, on the courage
and also the ability of the regulator
to check whether you are listed
as the firearm, the owner of that firearm.
So that that's a pretty easy test the ma meet
and you should be ready to make, meet that test at any time,
even when take a raffle through an airport.
Right. You do it happily with the
lady from me in New Zealand or whoever at the counter.
That's one level. If you're now talking about another level
where you can't prove that ownership quickly
and easily, then that might give rise
to a different type of test, isn't it?
Well we would suggest, I think with respect that that yes,
it does that I suppose that the person
you are driving your car, the police stop the car
for lawful reasons, they search it
and in the bag, in a bag there is a rifle
and they say, who this, the rifle?
And you say, I don't know, it's not mine.
And all the other people in the car say, not mine either.
Uh, you are deemed under the bill
to be in possession of that firearm.
Now the question is, should you have to prove
that it is more likely than not that you are not the owner
of firearm and you didn't know about it
or to raise a reasonable doubt,
which is a much lesser standard, that it's not your firearm,
that it was left there by somebody else, um,
without your knowledge.
And that's quite possible.
I mean, in your examples, so with the airline then,
I suppose you've picked up a case from the, your,
the airline assure of you
that this is your rifle in your case
and going, uh, okay, it looks like my case.
Then the police check the serial number when they stop you
and it's not your rifle.
Um, what would the o correct owners
of proof be under the bill?
You would have to prove it's more likely than
not. And that's
Then should, Should it even get there?
Should it even get to that stage?
Police would look at it
and go, we can't get, we we can't do that.
But the case of the gang members
and the people, multiple people in the car,
it's a real problem as to how you're going to do that
because the building Yeah, no, I
Get, I get the gang bit,
but if I, if even if I picked up the wrong case, uh,
there is still a, an element of saying, well, you know,
I thought it was my, and I was reasonably,
it was a reasonable act action that I did,
that I accepted the case
and I can prove what the situation over firearms license
and we've meant to have a so-called, um,
registerable ri rifles that a person owns.
So that's a pretty easy defense
to put at that point, isn't it?
Well, I dunno that it would be, um,
because it may depend on whether
or not that's actually a rifle that's been registered.
If it's an illegal firearm
Yeah, Your protestation that
that I don't know about it, it's not mine.
Maybe very much harder to make.
But then, then the question is w why shouldn't at
that point, if it isn't a legal firearm then that,
and you are cutting it around, um,
then there is no greater onus on you to prove
that you weren't aware of it
or in fact you weren't as not your rifle.
And some of the missing
We're, so we're postulating that you are not at fault
in receiving the rifle from the airline person.
So it looks like your case, they tell you it's your case,
it's got an illegal firearm inside it,
and you, you, you, you don't think it is
what would be the appropriate standard there.
I agree with you. In many cases there would be, you know,
if you've got a credible background,
but if you've not got a credible background, but it is,
and you are in fact innocent, you could get end up
with a wrongful conviction.
Okay. So we suggest that the point be be, be taken, um,
if I may move on from that, it is linked
and that is the question of the Bill of Rights advice.
The Attorney General, the Supreme Court
and Attorney Gen, um,
in Attorney Al versus the Attorney General held
that when you look at infringements of the Bill of Rights,
you must look to see whether there is,
it is a permissible infringement only.
And in doing so, you must look, is there a less intrusive
rights compliant method that you could use.
So it's not enough that a limitation on
member association is, is maybe justified.
You have asked only limited to the extent
that it is necessary
and there is no less al less intrusive alternative.
And in the, um, submission we take the example
of gang membership of a shooting range, um,
which they would be completely barred under this act.
That's obviously a breach of the Bill of Rights Act.
Right to freedom of association.
The question would be,
is there a less rights intrusive method
of preventing firearms on legal shooting ranges getting
into the hands of gangs for criminal purposes?
And they may well be,
and this should be considered, for example,
and this is my own, um, hypothetical, if you have a
shooting range and the, a police officer
invites a gang member to come onto the range
to shoot lawfully under the supervision
of the police officer, would that be objectionable?
And if the answer is no, then
that is a less rights intrusive alternative
to a complete ban on gang members being
part of shooting Rangers.
And so we would urge that, take the, the committee,
take further advice from Crown Law about whether there are
less intrusive models that could be used
and would still maintain the laudable objections.
I mean, we have absolutely support the objection,
the objective of the bill to reduce firearm use, uh,
illegal firearm use and the use of firearms
and committing offenses.
The question is, can it be done in a way which is not
as intrusive on the rights of individuals?
And we invite the committee to take advice on that.
Alright. Hey, thank you very much. Any questions?
Duncan, you've got any questions? Thought this might be No,
I, but I did. Oh, just, Jeremy,
thank you very much for that professor.
And, and, um, thanks for that insight
around the Bill of Rights Act.
I think that's something we hadn't
tuned our mind too well before.
But, uh, we will now. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank, thank you again for the chance.
Thank you. Sorry, sorry about your, um, your system,
but nice to see you again.
No, lovely. Thank you very much. Okay.
Right now we're moving on to museums
outa just in time.
Thank you. Very good.
Um, uh, Ms. McGuire McGuire is that, my
Name is Sarah McGuire. Thank you for having me.
Thank, well, good afternoon.
We've got 10 minutes. Thank you.
So, um, hopefully you'll leave
a little bit of time for questions.
Thank you so much. Uh, thank you all
for having me this afternoon.
My name is Sarah McGuire.
I'm the interim CEO of museums, which is the peak body
for public museums and galleries, uh, across the country.
Um, we have some 150 members and counting.
Uh, and importantly, uh, for this bill,
we represent institutions as well as their staff.
Uh, and in my sector
that also includes a number of volunteers.
Uh, you will have received our submission
and some of those, uh, from our members.
I'd hope to bring along some of my members today.
Uh, and I apologize they were interested in coming along,
but we're unable to be here.
So I've got some, some sort of comments
that they've passed on through me.
Um, and I'm very happy to take questions back
to my membership that you might have.
Uh, our members care for some 45 million objects, um,
and they employ some three
and a half thousand, uh, FTE jobs.
Our collections include military objects, weapons, tga,
Maori, and some essential, uh, contributions to education,
tourism, and of course social cohesion in our sense
of nationhood.
Um, on behalf of my member, uh, museums
and galleries, um, I'm here to commend this bill
and endorse the introduction of special license classes
for museum curators and museum workers.
We were really, um, pleased to see the draft of the bill.
Uh, and so we'd like to thank you for the work Thus far,
our submission is motivated by our members' commitment
to public safety and a desire
for pragmatism in the service of the public.
Good. Uh, right now, the law works for people who own guns,
um, and we welcome the proposed changes
to museum worker licenses.
Um, museum workers, as you well know,
do not take collection items home.
Uh, and something that my members were very keen
to communicate again, is that, um, the, the burden
to have to, uh, get a license
and have, make sure that those spaces at home are safe
for weapons that will never be taken home, um,
was really burdensome.
Um, we think museum workers should, of course, be able
to handle all the collection items that they need to, uh,
without secure, uh, storage facilities at home.
However, a couple of things
that came up when we looked at the draft, just ensuring
that the transport of weapons between work sites, uh,
is really clear for folks, um, that needs some consideration
as well as the appropriate licensing arrangement
for exhibition storage and transport.
In the appendix to our submission, we've got some sort
of detailed questions.
Um, but for this 10 minutes, I'll just go back over our,
uh, primary points.
Um, the majority feel sort of interest in
and understanding the majority of museum work is holding,
uh, or handling firearms,
would not have personal firearms licenses.
Um, and so those who do are really keen to ensure
that they're, my firearms profiles are separate from their
workplace, just so that those,
and I understand that there is the ability for that,
but it's, it would be great to make sure
that the sector is trained up so that they know how
to make their personal
and their, um, workplace, uh, profiles exist.
I think the, the, my Firearms Registry, um,
when we talked about this, to ensure a high level
of compliance, um, which is everybody's goal, the current
registry needs to be refined to meet the needs of museums
with rare and historic arms.
Um, and once a register, uh,
is complete easy access to it is one
of the key asks of my members.
Um, it is critical for museums, uh, so that they can, uh,
complete inventory checks, uh, readily.
And we thank the team at TEA for working with our members,
particularly at the New Zealand Navy Museum on this.
Um, we appreciate the consultation in terms
of timeframes and costs.
We are interested on the timeframe for renewal.
We've made some suggestions.
This is based on what we think is good.
We welcome your advice on that.
We do ask that you consider the burden of cost
for public institutions like museums
and galleries, uh,
when considering the timeframes for renewal.
Uh, and we ask for clarity in any rationale
or recommendations around the transfer of licenses.
And our sector turnover is a concern.
And so striking the right balance between kind of cost
and ensuring that, um, these licenses are, um, held
and there are not long lapses between licenses.
Um, as I said, we have a series of questions
for the committee and appendix one, I'm very happy
to take questions back to my membership. Okay.
Alright. Cool. Any questions? Right? I've got a couple.
Yeah. Oh, yeah. Um, honorable dun, Dr. Duncan web, sorry.
Oh, well, thank you Mr. Chair.
My question I don't think will take long.
Look, I I'm just curious to help us in, um,
thinking about this, can you talk a little bit about what
kind of, uh, weapons you might have
and how, you know, how you go about it,
how you disable them?
Because I don't,
your area is one which I
don't think we really know much about.
You know, the idea of, um, hunting guides
and so on is pretty easy to understand,
but the work that you do with military museums
and so on is perhaps something we're not as familiar with.
So I'm just inviting you to give us a bit
more of a practical insight.
Thank you. Uh, I would love
to give you more of a practical insight.
I can only, I can only really speak to
what I have here in my submission.
I think the, uh, there are some weapons that are, that are
so old that they don't have the serial numbers
and the, um, we, we don't know, uh,
much about the history of these objects.
That can be really hard when my member institutions are
loading them into a registry.
Uh, so the, the, the kind of providence of some
of our collection items isn't, is important.
So how do you deal with that at the moment?
How my members deal with that at the moment is they
cannot load them to the register. So
You have them sitting there, but
That's my understanding.
Yeah. And, and again, I wouldn't, I would like to fake
that point back to the membership.
Yeah. Some of my experts will have examples for you.
Yeah, I'm sure. And if, and if that's useful.
Uh, very happy to provide that.
It's why I also thanked the team
that has been working on this, uh, who have reached out
to my membership to ask about some of these,
um, specific situations.
Um, we can see how from both sides, it's difficult.
We have rare and historic weapons.
Um, and so we are the only ones who, who know what those are
and, and how they, um, might need to be listed.
Uh, and in terms of the, the second point,
I think in the appendix here, some of the questions
that my members raised were particularly around,
uh, was it a question?
Um, sorry, Mr. Webb, around
what could be converted into a functioning firearm?
Yeah, well, I mean, it's a bit, it was a bit broader than
that really because, um, we,
I don't have a good understanding of what kind
of artifacts would come into your, um, you know,
into your care and how you would usually deal with them.
I mean, I can understand, you know, you've got some old, um,
flintlock from the Musket wars and I can see that.
But equally, um, you, you know,
I imagine the Water museum has machine guns sitting
on display and so on.
And how do you go about storing and keeping those safe?
Yeah, the, I mean, safety is absolutely paramount
and they have very, very good systems in place.
A lot of the weapons are actually 3D printed.
Um, so a lot of, you know, we have a, we have a, a range,
um, particularly in our military museum.
So New Zealand Navy, like you say, the team up in
who would also be happy
to answer any questions that you have.
Um, the Nui Museum has a large range of weapons, um,
lots of T and Maori.
So the, I think that the kind of depth
and breadth of what we hold, um, on behalf of New Zealanders
and in public good is broad ranging.
Um, and I'm, I'm sorry
that I'm not an expert in this field
and can't answer anything more
Specifically As far as we can.
I know that the chair had a question.
Okay. Um, hey, just a couple of other things.
Uh, so we've heard about the transporting
of firearms is an issue, the surrendered firearms,
but that was, that was ing I dunno whether you heard
that submission about one option about how to deal
with a whole lot of unregistered firearms at the moment.
But what you are saying in your submission back,
that you would like to be considered as a source of,
if they had providence
and stuff, you'd like to be able to have access to those.
That's right. My members have raised with me
that it is an important avenue for collections.
Yeah. And if we were to be, if we are able
to collect from donors in this way, that would be, that's,
that's really important to us.
If we had to, uh, you know, buy from a business
or a dealer rather than receive these from a, a donor,
that would have an impact.
Yeah. So some more clarity on what
that looks like is Okay. Is called mm-hmm.
That's fascinating. And just
that your very first point though,
you said you want a licensing period of
between four and seven years.
So what, what, what, just take us
through what's the situation at the moment?
At the moment? I understand
that it could be 12 monthly annually.
Is that, is it the current system? Is that right? Yeah.
Officials are back saying it's 12 months.
So you're saying you,
and when you say this licensing, what does that mean
to operate and to hold firearms or to,
To renew the license? It's really an
Administer to be able to hold firearms and show them
Yeah. It's an administrative
point that has a
Cost obligation. And what most you have to be
re at the moment, you have
to be done every year, every 12 months.
Yeah, it will do. And it takes about four months
To do. Cool.
We don't have huge
Turnover at museums. Hear
what we just said. Okay.
We'll just put a big tick beside that way. Right. Okay.
Cool. Right. Any other questions? No, very helpful.
All I'm gonna suggest to the honorable member from
Christchurch Central that he needs to get on a plane
and float it by, well, somewhere up to Auckland,
drive down to wa
No, I've done that before, But that would be great.
All right. Hey, thank you for your time. Thanks for coming.
Right. Very good submission.
Now we're gonna move on to, well,
we've got a buffer actually, but we've lost the buffer.
Um, a SG,
uh, and we've got a couple of people.
Oh, very good. Thank you very much. Uh, Mr. Wayne and Mr.
Wayne, oh, sorry. Ms. Wayne and Mr. Wayne, is that right?
Yes, that's correct. Thank you very much.
Hey, now we've got 10 minutes with you. Alright,
So good afternoon members of the committee.
So, um, thank you for the opportunity to speak.
Um, it's my first time here, so, uh, forgive if I stutter.
No problem. So my name is Nora.
I am the manager of A SGC New Zealand Limited.
And with me today is Tim, the owner.
So, um, our company has been operating for nearly 20 years
and, uh, is one of the most established air
of business in New Zealand.
What does it do? Just just be clear. What's the initials?
Is that your full name? Uh, yes. And and what do you do?
So we sell Airsoft guns. Airsoft guns. Yeah. Right.
So, uh, really similar to paintball guns. Yeah. Mm-hmm.
Um, so we were the first brick
and mortar airsoft store in the country
and have experienced every major change in regulation
that has affected Airsoft since then.
Alright. So we've been, uh, compliant for the last 20 years.
Um, airsoft actually originated in Japan in the seventies
and has been a recreational sport in
New Zealand for the last 30 years.
Now, from our understanding, the arms field was
to create a greater protection of public safety
and, uh, basically simplify those
requirements to improve compliance.
Now, it also aims to close loopholes and clarify the law.
However, the proposed changes affecting Airsoft
does not achieve these goals.
Instead creates additional loopholes
and gray areas, uh, rather than reducing it.
So the current classification and regulation of as
or replicas actually causes confusion
and creates a misinformed fear that is disproportionate
to the actual harm and risk.
Now as a result, um, this regulation is quite inefficient
to the likes of police and customs, uh, in regulating it
and may waste time and valuable, uh, sorry,
valuable time and resources.
So, uh, from our understanding,
this could detract their attention from higher priority arms
items, making these regulations, uh, ineffective
to its purpose of reducing the risk of public safety.
So from our point of view, we are all for regulation
and of course with the, uh, purpose of reducing, um,
the risk of, you know, risk to public safety.
So the three key issues that we have in relations to, um,
air of guns is number one, is the, um,
appearance BA based classification.
Right? So, uh, the appearance based classification is
something that is quite subjective
and, uh, you know, with previous, um, uh,
what do you call it, um, with A SNZ
that was here for the hearing before.
Yeah. Uh, mentioned about the definition
of restricted air guns being classified
as a standard firearm.
It is something that's quite broad
and would basically impasse, uh, sorry,
income pass everything together.
Yeah. Yeah. So, uh, from our perspective, um,
we do require some clarification in this part,
but at the same time, uh, the classification
of a guns is actually all bunched into one.
Now, this could ring from anywhere between something
that fires metal projectiles.
Yeah. Plastic bbs, uh, gel balls, paint balls to something
that fires form, uh, such as NF guns.
So in that sense, um, this creates a lot of confusion
and interpretation, um, for these, um, you know, uh,
regulatory frameworks to actually basically, um, sorry
to regulate it essentially.
Yeah. So from our perspective, um, ideally we'll like
to see some clarification on this part
and as well maybe some exemptions based on, um, replicas
that actually fire, uh, things that are intended to be
for gaming purposes.
So, uh, with the likes of painful, with the likes of aol,
with the likes of, of Gel Blast,
these are considered the lowest risk
in category of air guns.
So, Kim, I, we've had a number of submissions on this.
Yes. And so, um, and it's very nice what you've done,
but we've had the recommendation that, um, any
air gun mm-hmm.
And they, uh, using compressor at 12
feet per pound or 16 joules mm-hmm.
Uh, anything above that would be seen as a definition Yes.
And be captured. Anything under that wouldn't be. I see.
So my question to you, do you do your, your types of, uh,
ear guns that you use, do they fit below that category? Uh,
Sorry, what was the drill rating? 12,
Sorry. Um, 12,
16 joules, or 12 feet per pound, is it?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So, um, I'm not quite sure about,
Do you mean do you have, do you know, oh,
you probably don't know what your muzzle speed are. Yeah.
So our MLE three,
Three and a half. Yeah.
I assume, because we heard 1.5 earlier on.
So you are way below that threshold. Correct.
So if you were below that threshold,
you'd be as happy as Larry?
Uh, yes or no? So the definition
of a guns is actually pretty bored broad.
So, um, in a sense, something like that,
under the current interpretation
of the Arms Act is actually considered, uh,
not looking like a set firearm or a pistol.
Whereas this fires three times the power as something
as an s of, uh, pistol
that could fire less than one gel, for example.
Yeah. Well that's why that's by the,
the proposal we heard was that if it's under 12, um,
16 jewels Yeah.
Yes. Then it would be
outside the regulations, it wouldn't be captured.
So nothing about how it looks about
That. So nothing on how it looks.
Yeah,
Yeah. Unless it
could be replicated
and look, looks like a real thing, that would be a different
Story. Correct. So ideally,
um,
there's also the intended purpose of these air guns.
So something that fires, let's say, above three drills
that fire is, um, uh, like a pellet or a,
or a slug, shouldn't be the same purpose as something
that fires, um, plastic babies, jaw glasses
or paintballs they are, that are intended
as a gaming sort of, uh, replica.
So in this sense, the purpose of this would be more
for target shooting or, uh, vomit hunting as opposed
to something that is designed
to shoot at people at one another.
So it's a bit of, bit like a, um, um, like a Call
of Duty game, if I may say.
So. It's pretty much, um, something that,
that shouldn't be classified as the same category regardless
of, um, their jewels.
Okay. Right. So in a sense it would be, uh, more
of a projectile based classification just to separate, um,
these two different risks of air guns.
Alright, thank you. I think we hear that.
Uh, any questions from anyone? Cool.
I think there's another solution to deal
with your problem, but, right.
Yes. Thank you very much for your submission today.
Oh, uh, unless you want, you got more? Yes,
I got more. Oh, you got more.
Sorry about that. Okay. Sorry,
I'm cutting you off. Yeah.
So the second one is the, um, subjective, uh, requirements
for the import permits.
Yeah. So as of stage, um, with the restricted a guns, um,
there is a requirement that says that, um, it has
to be a special reason accepted by the chief executive.
Um, now the special reason, uh, at,
at the current time is just restricted to, uh, selling
to members of a ESOL club.
Now with this, um, requirement,
it is rather subjective and not objective.
And it doesn't actually, sorry, I lost, lost myself there.
It's actually not proportionate
to reducing the risk, uh, to public safety.
Now, just because, um, let me find my notes. My bad.
Sorry. Uh,
That's all right. We don't.
So, um, club membership in,
in itself does not actually ensure
that an individual understands legal responsibilities
related to the possession and use of s of replicas.
Now, uh, to us, membership cannot measure legal awareness
or compliance in that sense.
Now, furthermore, club members are legally permitted
to sell these, um, as replicas to other adults
that are not members of club,
which means the import restriction does not meaningfully
limit access to general public.
Now, in regard to this, um,
asso guns are actually very low risk items,
and the only risk they may present is, um,
if they're brought into public, that could be,
uh, mistaken as a real firearm.
Exactly. Now, um, the largest risk
and largest harm is actually to the user itself.
Now, for anyone to actually bring that risk
to themselves is usually because of the lack of education
or knowledge or legal obligations around the compliance
of the use and possession of these things.
Now, from our perspective, um, the idea is
to reduce public safety.
So what, uh, within my submission, um,
I actually included the, um, an implementation
of a knowledge base requirement, uh, something
that could maybe be educational
and bring them the illegal awareness
and, uh, consequences to owning one of these.
Uh, we believe that this could benefit, um,
in reducing public safety further.
Sorry, I don't understand your logic because mm-hmm.
The issue we've got, and that was my final point
before, if, if you bring in a, a pistol,
let's say an a soft pistol that looks like a real pistol.
Yep. The, the concern that anyone will have is that
that will be used as a replica for a real gun
and he'll use in crime.
Right. So it's nothing about the issue with the user,
the user's using it deliberately to commit a, uh, crime.
So don't you think there should be some rules around, um,
pistols or rifles that look real
and could be used in a criminal sense quite easily?
Absolutely. So, um, at, with the current, uh, arms Act,
there is regulations about bringing this into public.
Um, in terms of importation,
the only acceptable reason is just because they look real.
Right? So they are to be sold to members of a club,
but that does not guarantee that a member
of a club is aware of
Not bringing that into public.
Right. Okay. All right, cool. Thank you.
Right anymore. Right. Hey, thank you for your time today.
I really appreciate both of you for coming. No worries.
Thank you. Right.
Um, we are onto the New Zealand Pistol Association.
We've got a lot of pistol people today.
You've been waiting all day very patiently
and being helpful from gallery.
Yes. Every, occasionally.
Just occasionally keep you as on the line.
Oh.
Um, ura uh, Deborah Lamb, I'm,
uh, the chair of Piston New Zealand.
Um, I just wanna thank the committee
for hearing submissions on the arms bill
and also to the Ministry of Justice, um, for all the work
that they have done thus far.
Um, so yeah, I'm here
to represent Plus from New Zealand today.
So I'm just gonna talk to you.
I'm not going to go through our submission, um,
but there is a couple of supplementary things I'd
like to bring to your attention.
Don't have that face, um, purely
because you'll understand why when I talk about them.
Um, but broadly speaking, piston New Zealand, uh,
broadly supports the bill.
Um, obviously we, our main focus is public safety, um,
and around education, um, for people who use firearms,
all our rangers have to be certified.
Um, so we're actually under quite a higher regime of
expectations, um, to do our sport within New Zealand.
Um, one of the aspects that is coming
to the fore at the moment for us is that all our ranges,
as I said, have to be certified.
They were last certified in 2022,
and so they have to be certified
by the 24th of June in 2027.
Um, and there's nothing in any of the legislation currently,
um, that allows for, so just with licensing, there was some,
um, extra legislation put in so that if you apply
for your license prior to the date
and the processing takes time to be done,
your license is still current until it has been determined.
Um, that is not the case for ranges.
So all our ranges, um, they also have to have a consent,
which is, um, a new piece in the legislation.
Um, it's, it's been in there since the amendments, um,
that were done a few years back.
But it does mean that a lot of our ranges are now having
to get the consent, um, from
Whom, from The council.
Um, yeah, it's, it says regional authority
and territorial authority.
We would actually like that to be amended to, or, um,
or in fact actually not have a consent at all.
A lot of our clubs have been going for 40 years,
so they've been going for decades without having
to have that consent.
Um, and as we know, to get a resource consent,
or again, even a council consent is quite costly. So is,
I don't, presumably you are, you've been operating
on a proper basis for many, many years.
Yes. So suddenly we've popped into a legislation
that we need to go and get a council consent.
It's been in since, yeah.
After the amendments in 2019. Um, and
What, what do you understand,
what were the reasons given at that time?
No, they weren't. Yeah, no, no, that's,
that's on your side of the table.
Um, no, there were, there were sort of, um,
And is it just from pistol ranges or
Actually, no. And for rifle, right? It's
actually for all pistol,
shotgun and rifle ranges.
Um, and so it's actually clause 2 2 8 B in the current arms
bill, if you wanna have a look at that.
And, and the current act as it now stands, it's 38 U.
So that could take years and cost you a fortune.
Well, yes. And it could also close.
And so obviously I'm in discussions with the regulator.
Um, and you know,
there's also another clause in the current bail clause
2, 2 5 that says pistol ranges must be certified.
So if they have not had that recertification done
by the 24th of June, 2027, they will be closed.
And that is a real risk to the community in the sense
that you've got all these ranges,
and it's not through ballistic, it's not a ballistic matter
that's causing a closure.
It's a paperwork matter that's causing a closure.
So let me just understand.
So either you've gotta get, you've gotta get either a TLA
or a regional council to sign new off the course.
You've gotta go through their process. Mm-hmm.
Or if you haven't,
and our old rules you as long as you applied
before the due date, 22
or 27, then if, if the regulator, the firearms
or police in that case, yeah.
Uh, pro, um, had that notification
before that date, then you're okay.
Yeah. But now you've gotta actually do the council
and get the police over the line or before, before the date.
Correct. Otherwise you Yeah. Null and void. Yeah.
So we are just asking for, um, a traditional piece
of legislation that would allow it
and say we did it with firearms licenses as well
because we've got the bellack curve.
And so now with firearms licenses, if you apply
before the date of your expiry, it's considered
to be current until your application has been processed
and either given or declined.
And we would like that for ranges.
'cause June 27th, not that far away.
Um, and so that, that, so sorry, that is additional
to my submission.
Mm-hmm. Um, and there's just one other piece
'cause I know you have questions.
Um, in Schedule one a six, which is around fees, core range,
recertification, if you have, um, a club, say
with 10 ranges, if they've had no significant changes,
it's being read as $200 per range.
So that could cost them, because there's no maximum.
If there's no change, you'll see when you look at the
schedule, it could cost them them up to $2,000
if they have had significant changes,
the price is $400 plus 45 for every range to a maximum
of $600.
So actually if you've got no changes,
it's gonna cost you more than
if you've got significant changes.
I think it's a typo, but could you look at that please?
When the regulations get looked at, um, it just needs
that little piece that's above it to come down to say
that it's for the all ranges on that complex as opposed
to individual ranges.
Um, so yeah. So those are my, and I have got those.
Yeah, a few. I can leave these, but paper with you would.
Um, but, um, but yeah, basically
otherwise pistol New Zealand, you know, we support the bill,
we support safer communities.
We support having rangers
and clubs where people can learn about safe firearms
handling and use and obviously wish,
we wish for that to continue.
And I'm gonna stop and see if there's any questions.
So is there anything else that you,
that you've been sitting here,
all Dave, is there anything else?
I think, are we missing anything
that we should be asking you about?
Um, I think that the biggest challenge
for clubs is the administrative workload.
And, you know, the, the biggest thing that we want,
which I have, we have said in our submission, is
that we want an arms bill that is quite clear,
regulations that are quite clear.
And to minimize the, the interpretation by the regulator.
You know, we want people to stay within the tent.
We want people to keep having firearms licenses.
We want people to be using firearms safely.
We want safe storage.
And to enable all of those things to happen,
we need legislation
and subsequent paperwork that enables that to happen.
That's plea. Um, so yes.
I've got a question from on honorable Jenny Anderson. Jen,
Thank you very much. Um,
Mr. Chair, can you hear me all right? Yep. Yes you can.
Great. Um, I was just interested
and thank you for your submission.
Um, do you think that there seems to be quite a bit
of a difference between how pistol
and non pistols, whether their clubs
or rangers are sort of treated overall?
Did, do you, did you have a view on that
and whether that's been fair in general?
There is a definite difference.
Jenny, thank you very much for the question.
Um, yes.
Um, I think ranges potentially should be certified.
Um, regardless it's about having a safe ballistic space
for people to learn and, and handle and use firearms safely.
Um, obviously pistol has always had that, that highest level
of regulation, so around the 12 attendances, uh,
around being a certified range around, um, training,
all of that kind of thing.
Um, and yeah, I guess that's always the way it's been.
Um, but certainly the,
the consent thing is a big, big issue for us.
And also there's a regulation around participation,
which is 28 gm.
Um, whereby while it says that we have to do 12 attendances
or activities per year, which is in 22, uh, one B
28 GM goes on to say that we have
to record every single participation
by every single person on every club activity day.
And so that means if you've got a pistol club,
'cause this is only applying to pistol clubs, um,
that has 250 operational days a year,
their secretary has to record every single person
for every day location.
And, and the activity.
And our question for that is,
is why shotgun clubs don't need to do that.
Rifle clubs don't need to do that.
But doesn't it we do our 12. Yeah. How do you know that?
So why do we need done 12 then?
So we, that's already, we all, we all have, um, swipe cards
or we sign a book or the clubs in a variety of ways.
So doesn't, if you got a swipe card, well, about 30%
of our clubs don't have power or internet.
Mm-hmm. We are rural
otherwise then you have to record everyone.
Yeah. And so you've got,
and then it needs to go into a spreadsheet
obviously for the regulator.
So there is quite a bit of work involved.
Two quick questions from me. Yeah.
Uh, two quick questions from me. Yes.
Actually, just on the 12 attendances a year Yes.
Keep your endorsement. We've heard some, um, evidence today
that that might be too high.
Do you have an opinion on that?
Um, from a association point of view, it is what it is.
But we do recognize that there are places
in New Zealand that close.
You know, if you think of, uh, down
for Ham way in the South island, a lot of those ranges close
for three months a year due to weather.
Yeah. Um, so there's all those kind of restrictions.
And also as, as you did here earlier today, you know,
people are working seven days a week these days shift work.
So it is complicated.
And again, in the past
before firearm safety authority, a club
could give a little bit of dispensation.
Yeah. So if you knew somebody had a double his hip
replacement, I've got a, a lady at the moment who has, um,
had pregnancy so she didn't shoot for nine months.
She's represented New Zealand internationally
and she has put in an application
for an exemption for the year.
And it's, it's, it's a bit
of a hard line with the regulator.
Really. Yeah. Okay. That's, so it's, that's, that's where,
that's where it's becoming difficult. Okay.
That's good. That's a concern. And then
just the other one quick one.
Um, and thanks, your,
your submission's very detailed, so thank you.
Just wanted to double check though.
Um, obviously we've also talked about this additional
endorsement for magazines.
Yeah. You, you support getting rid of that as well.
So you have what we call epistle endorsement.
I, I think, to be honest, endorsements need to be looked at
because as you heard that other gentleman there are over 20,
I don't know now, in the old days there used to be like five
and if you've got a pistol endorsement, when I, I've just,
I bought a pistol a couple weeks ago
'cause I shoot the, um, Olympic style of, of shooting.
And on that application it says magazines.
So I've, the magazines come with the firearm. Yeah.
They're for that firearm. It's my same pistol endorsement.
Why do I need a magazine endorsement separate,
which is only gonna create more work for the, the regulator
and also myself.
Thank you. Last question,
how many ranges have closed in the last couple of years?
Um, oh, you would have, it would be over 10.
Um, I've just had two clubs in the last week.
One has closed and one has notified
by closing the end of next year.
Why? Some of it's because they're on private land
and so obviously the family, um, that one's going
to be the family gentleman whose land is on.
He's, um, not doing too well.
So, um, the family are, are going to sell that land.
Um, some of it's, um, a lot of it's noise.
Some, some of it's, we are getting noise, um, um,
restrictions and reverse sensitivity
and somebody moving in next door.
Um, but yes, so yeah,
so there was a little bit, so there are lots of
Challenges. So 12, sorry,
how many? 10 or so?
Um, I'm just trying to think,
I'm just gonna count the mark
because it's eight three, I think it's 14.
14 out of how many We've got 330 ranges. Mm-hmm.
Alright. Alright. But that's on 84 clubs.
So some clubs have more than others. One club.
Oh, 84 clubs. Yeah.
So yeah, so we've got, I think it's 86 isn't it?
It's 86 clubs. Um, and they, and so like, um,
So the 14 some clubs the 14, So that's three
Clubs. Oh, that's
three clubs. Yeah. Yeah. Three out of 86. Yeah.
Okay. Cool. Thank. Alright. Right. Cool.
Thank you for your time. That's
Right. If you have any
other questions, please
I Sure. Context we'll
ask you from the Right. Right now it's
Just flights from Tur. We're
back into antique
and Historical Arms Association by Zoom.
Is it?
Yes, it is by Zoom.
Very good. We can hear you Mr. Chandler. Thank you.
Can you see me as well? No, not yet.
Okay. I can fix that.
How's that?
Ah, I look at you. You looking very, yeah.
Exceptionally very good. Right? We've got 10 minutes.
You, um, hopefully you've been following
things, so just need a bit. Yeah. Cool.
Look, thank you very much for hearing, um, our submission.
I'm currently the president of the Auckland Branch
of New Zealand Antique and Historical Arms Association.
And our branch has 175 members
that are licensed firearms owners
and collectors of firearms and militaria.
And we hold monthly meetings, regular shoots,
and help other firearms owners dispose of arms
and ammunition safely.
I'd just like to run through what we support.
We support the, uh, setup of an independent regulator,
removing the police from being the regulator.
We also support the setup
of a firearms licensing review committee so
that licensed firearm owners have a low cost way to appeal.
We support the ban on gang members having firearms licenses
and wish this to be extended to include
proven gang associates.
And we support a system whereby the regulator can address
minor breaches with improvement notices.
We wish that another category of improvement notice be added
for breaches of transport of firearms as the rules
around transporting firearms are very unclear.
And finally, and I think the things
that we support is we very much support the amnesty
and we support the grace period or amnesty
and wish this to be extended to 12 months
to allow the multiple issues with firearms and magazines.
And this has been caused by poor, uh, police communication
of the ban on prohibitive
firearms, magazines and ammunition.
We wish the amnesty, uh, to be 12 months so that, um,
these can be addressed.
And this grace period we would like to be extended
to all licensed firearms owners
to bring these previously unregistered firearms restricted
magazines or restricted, um,
weapons into the official firearms registry without facing
prosecution for prior non reregistration.
Um, I guess one
of the big things our club believes in is
fundamental rights.
And no other minority in society, um, has
been treated as badly
with their fundamental rights as firearms owners.
We have lost the right to remain silent, silent,
and we are treated as guilty and we must be proven innocent.
We are also subjected to warrantless searches.
I would ask, um, the people sitting in the select committee
to consider the treatment of, uh, firearms owners.
This, uh, minority in society, uh, has
been treated very poorly
and their fundamental rights have been taken away.
Now to just look at some of our points,
which our members think are very important, the first thing,
uh, that comes on the list is deactivation.
Now we heard with the Airsoft people about, um,
imitation firearms.
Now, in our opinion, there's no reason for the deactivation
of firearms that this bill pushes into the, onto the public
and licensed firearms owners.
And we believe that deactivation
results in very real firearms in the hands
of an unlicensed public.
And if I look at the UK where deactivation is
common, a a third of armed robberies are committed
with imitation firearms that include deactivated firearms.
And do we really need this threat?
In New Zealand, the answer is no.
And deactivation is strongly resisted
by the firearms community as we know, as we,
the licensed firearm owners know
that if criminals start using deactivated firearms
as they do in the uk, then we,
the legal firearms owners suffer the political backlash.
It's plain, uh, to our club members that deactivation
and endangers public safety.
The reason for this is plain
and simple, permanently deactivated firearms in the hands
of the public creates much more likelihood
of realistic firearms being used in crimes by criminals.
And criminals can get hold of realistic firearms
because deactivated firearms won't be covered
by the arms act.
Mm-hmm. This, we believe is poorly thought out
with little regard to the possible negative consequences.
Now I'd like to, uh, look at section 37 of the bill.
And our club is a collector's club,
and we believe that the criteria
for a collector's endorsement
for restricted firearms is too narrow.
We want to add extra recognized, uh, criteria
for firearms collectors.
A collector has an interest in the historical or cultural
or engineering or scientific
or aesthetic significance of firearms.
So we've added a couple more, um, criteria there.
Furthermore, in section 37,
it goes on about transporting firearms.
Yeah. And this is a, a, a very complicated area.
And collectors have had the historic right
to transport firearms, including restricted firearms.
And the act must reflect this. Right.
And I suggest we add collectors may transport firearms
to a gun show option or club event.
And if you look at, um, section 37,
it has a requirement
that transport must be ac com accompanied
by the endorsement document.
And we believe this is very cumbersome, onerous,
and open to errors.
And the last submitter talked about the
administrative workload.
Well, that's not the only thing we believe, um, that
transport must be, uh, accompanied
by an endorsed document can be deleted from the act.
And if you add collectors may transport firearms,
but must have their license ready
for inspection if required.
Now, I'd like to also, um, talk about, um,
record keeping requirements.
This current arms bill says the collector must maintain a
register of restricted items, including acquisition details,
storage, location, and any movement or display history.
Now, currently most of our members, in fact, 99% of them
maintain a register of their items,
including their acquisition details
and obviously where they're stored.
But the addition of any movement
or display history is complex and onerous
and open to misinterpretation in errors.
Our members are law abiding
and demand simplification of the record keeping requirement.
Suggestion, our suggestion is
that collectors must keep a copy of the permit to possess.
Now, the permit to possess is a document that any collector,
uh, must, uh, obtain from the police
for a transfer of a firearm.
And that document, we believe is the only thing
that the collector should keep.
Now, I would say that
I talked about administrative workload.
We believe that notifying the regulator of any movement
or display history is onerous and unworkable.
And the penalties for this, for a mistake in this regard
are way out of proportion.
And I'd just like to give you one example In section two 50,
unlawful carriage of a firearm.
Our club has grave concerns over this section
as there is no precise definition of alarming carriage.
Alarming carriage leaves the firearm, licensed firearms open
to ambiguous or vexatious public complaints.
What makes this especially severe and unjust?
Other penalties.
Seven years of what can be a minor infraction where a member
of the public feels alarmed and I believe
and so does our club, that this is very poor law.
Alarming courage needs to be deleted, if not an exemption
for collectors, dealers,
and theatrical licensees is necessary.
And we have many members of our club who are reenactors
and alarming courage.
A person may see a reenactor going to an event,
feel upset, call the police.
This is alarming. Courage. Now, just consider this.
The penalty of seven years in this act
for alarming courage is over the top.
Here is a crimes act comparison.
Significant violence, aggravated assault
or wounding is seven years as well.
Sexual offending, unlawful sexual connection is seven years.
Alarming someone while transporting a firearm, seven years
prohibited magazine possession seven years.
I ask you to consider the balance there
and it's wrong As a club, we are antique Cs
and we're very interested in antique firearms.
And section two, the interpretation.
We as a club request a plain English, um,
clarity on specific exemptions.
In the spirit of this arms bill,
a section needs to be added.
We have a whole lot of firearms that are under the, uh,
control of the arms act that are pre 1900 firearms,
that fire rim fire ammunition that is no longer available.
So we would request that pre 1900 firearms,
that fire rim fire ammunition greater than 22 caliber.
And these firearms are iron or poor quality steel.
And the ammunition hasn't been available
for more than 80 years.
And we think this is an essential addition to the list
of antique firearms.
We also believe that flare pistols need to be added.
We also believe that line throwing firearms, for example,
marine line throwing that means, uh, ship to ship,
all fishing line throwing firearms be added
to the list of exemptions.
The yachties amongst us will know about signal cannons
and miniature cannons.
These need to also be specifically detailed in the list
of exemptions from the Arms Act imitation firearms,
antique firearms.
And I think another essential addition is pre 1930.
Air guns or air canes, as most of these air guns
or air canes pre 1930s are a very low power.
Now in the interpretations
and definitions, we come to a very thorny technical issue.
And I apologize if you can't follow this,
but I'm going to mention it
because it is very, uh, vexatious.
We are talking about the definition
of a pistol carbine conversion kit.
This is a kit where a pistol club member can place his
pistol in and a frame if you like,
and shoot it from the shoulder instead of from the hand.
Currently this definition
of a pistol carbine conversion kit is so vague
and all encompassing that it captures collectors' items,
meaning firearms that are held on a collector's license.
These firearms are unable to be fired and often very old.
We have no issue at all
with pistol club members having extra regulations for the
ps, the pistol carbine conversion kits they shoot.
But our club wants the, uh,
pistol carbine conversion kit definition,
specifically excluding firearms held on a collector's
license as currently World War I artillery, Luger,
world War I broom handle.
And um, indeed Bo War Broom handle Maers
and a host of other pistols with shoulder stocks.
This is not a frame in which a pistol fits.
This is a shoulder stock that fits
on the rear of the pistol.
All of these are considered under the current regulations
to be pistol carbine conversion kits.
And this is a clearly a situation which
is a result of a very vague law and is wrong
and needs to be corrected.
Okay, finally. Yep. Prohibited.
Yep. Um, prohibited magazines,
I think they should be removed from the register
and should be only allowed in the possession
of licensed firearms owners with appropriate endorsements.
This would fix what the police
and the firearm safety authority
and collectors recognize as a regulatory mess.
And further to the last submission, collectors recognize
that any pistol magazine that is not a, um, a prohibited
or restricted magazine is a specific addition to the law.
Okay. So what we are saying is
a pistol magazine should not be regulated.
And the last, um, breath,
I would say prohibited AM ammunition collectors would ask
for a buyback from Parliament
because this ammunition has been banned,
it's been previously available.
Collectors under license have been able to collect it.
The pa this current law will ban it.
That means I think that the, um, regulator
and parliament has to acknowledge that the,
they have prohibited the sale of private property
and that would be, uh, grounds for a buyback.
Okay. Can I ask you, I think we're all,
when you were talking about the deactivation of firearms,
so just to help us with that clarity, what you're,
if a firearm might go back to my two 70,
if it's de deactivated
Yes. Um,
can that be sold to anyone
who doesn't necessarily have, have a firearms license or
Given if, if it has been deactivated in,
in the current situation?
According to the UK law, which is what, um, this is this,
uh, part of the act has been styled on, then
that is no longer a firearm.
So that means your two 70 would have its barrel cut,
it's bolt weld welded up and you could hang it on the wall
and you don't need a firearms license to possess it.
Anyone can. Wow. Alright. Hey, just an object then.
Thank you very much for your submission. Very good.
Um, a lot of good points there, but we've gotta move on Mr.
Chandna. Thank you so much. Thank you very much.
Right now, um, we're probably gonna stop at three
for a brief break,
but we've got the yca Waikato Artillery Museum Zoom
Mr.
Dickey's on the phone by the sound of it. You there Mr.
Dickie?
Can you hear us? I can hear you now. Yep.
And I'll Oh, there,
you've got a couple of you there. Cool.
And you can see us too, right? Um,
Are you, are you coming in from Theron?
Indeed, there's three of us.
Oh wow. Okay. We've got 10 minutes.
Um, just leaves us a bit of time
for questioning. Thank you. That'd be great.
Thank you very much. Uh, thank you for the opportunity
to, uh, address you.
I'd just like to introduce my colleagues here.
My name firstly is, uh, Blair Dickey
as you, uh, just found out.
Um, I'm, uh, a museum volunteer and committee member.
I'd like to introduce Jack Mills, uh,
former gun Sergeant Fourth Medium Battery,
who's our museum curator.
And Paul Sule, retired Brigadier General.
And until very recently, Colonel Comant
of the Royal Regiment of New Zealand Artillery, patron
of the Museum, and now a museum volunteer.
Very good. Primarily our submission is we support the
aim intent of the new legislation
and we support the creation of new license categories, uh,
that relate to the operation
of a museum containing firearms.
We'd like to draw the committee's attention
to an uneven interpretation
and implementation of the current law with respect to making
heritage artillery equipment safe.
And we consider this has created a loss of national
cultural heritage and seek recognition
and protection for artillery.
He heritage in law.
Uh, we consider this can be achieved in a number of ways.
Firstly by the creation of a new class of firearm that
of artillery firearm legislative guidance
to the arms regulator for the clear protection, uh,
for heritage, examples of artillery firearms,
a requirement for curation, maintenance, conservation
and storage and display of artillery firearms
to be a knowledge
and experience requirement of the arms advisory board.
And we have some suggestions for that.
And, um, leaving you time for questions, I'd now like to,
um, invite the committee to ask any questions you may have
of us in relation to our submission.
Thank you.
Right. Well I'll start off.
Um, so your submission is that you, um,
under the current rules you'd have to world up a piece
of artillery equipment or mortal or whatever it might be.
So it's in operable you.
And the logic I presume goes
one is it loses its historical ability to be able to show
how it works in future.
But I presume also your argument is to fire a mortar
or a bigger artillery piece needs specialized ammunition
and you just don't go and get a big, um, artillery piece
and start firing it off that easily, unlike a a rifle.
So is that your other driver for it?
That, because what, what rules do you have to have
around the, um, what you do with the ammunition
for a big artillery piece or whatever, or mortar shell?
Well, I'm happy to answer that. Um,
Is this the brigadier general?
It is indeed, yes.
Now, um, an artillery round is a very sophisticated piece
of equipment, alright.
And it's, we call it the ammunition system.
First of all, as a civilian, you couldn't get hold of it,
particularly in New Zealand.
Okay. Only the military or defense force looks after that.
And it's very closely guarded.
And the the critical thing is that the projectile
that comes out of the, uh, the cat again is,
there'd be nobody in New Zealand who could sit down
and manufacture that independently,
let alone the quite complex fuse mechanism
that goes on the top of it.
So even if someone was to somehow get a workable cannon
and decide that he'll run
around the streets threatening somebody with it,
that's very unlikely he would've the ammunition be able
to get his hands on ammunition to do anything with it.
So I guess our argument is that these pieces of equipment,
these are artillery guns,
should not be treated as a normal firearm.
And we find it very difficult to see how anyone could see it
as a threat to the New Zealand public.
Yeah,
I get that. So that's
right. Hence the question I presumably with your,
even if you do have artillery pieces, uh, artillery shells,
you've gotta diffuse 'em.
You can't keep 'em in a live state.
So if, if that is the case
and I presume it is, then you can't fire any piece
of artillery shell, we
Don't any ammunition, live ammunition in a museum. Yeah.
So That people may pick up will be made of wood.
Yeah. Like the weight of that ammunition
That makes your case even stronger.
Yes. Alright, cool. Okay.
Anyone else got any other questions? No. Good submission.
Good. We hear what you've gotta say. Um, very good.
I like the picture too. Understand it. Thank you.
Where are you? Are you in the museum in the main street
at, uh, Hamilton?
Uh, we're, we're out. Um, from
Morinville, a little place called.
Well, I need to come and see you.
We need a committee trip, Mr. Need to come and see. I
Think you would, we we are only too happy to invite you
to come out to the museum.
We'll put on a special lunch figure.
Have got any, have you got any tanks out there?
Any tank. Tank?
Thanks. We're the only dedicated artillery museum
in New Zealand and
Very good. All right. Well,
Can I ask who asked that question?
Was it the chairman? Yeah.
And that's because you've got an armored background, right?
Maybe Yes. Okay.
At a service background.
But, and you would understand I think the emotional
connection that we of course Gunner have to our guns,
that they were our colors.
And to see them welded us welded up even
outside an RSA brings tears to our eyes.
Well, I had a closer affinity
to my parachute, I've gotta tell you.
But anyway, we've gotta move
On, Right?
Hey, hey, thank you for your submission.
Hey, now we're gonna take, um,
we'll just take seven minutes,
we'll be back at five past three.
We've got our next submitter, um, century Otago Pistol Club.
Oh, good. People in Central Town.
So we'll just take seven minutes,
members we'll see in a few minutes.
Oh,
now we've got, um, central Otago pistol clip.
We good to go? Oh, you are here?
Yeah, I had all the way from the cloud.
You've been sitting right in the back. Mm, cool.
Right, cool. In Preston it says Mr. Yeah, yeah. Rob,
Right now. Hi, I'm,
I'm Robert Andrews from the Secretary
of the Central Target Pistol Club.
Um, we have about 60 members.
I am also a collector and,
and the member of the Antic Arms Association.
I'm also full-time employed in pest control using
semi-automatic firearms and,
and have been in, in that field for about 35 to 40 years.
I'm also involved in, in Venice
and recovery with helicopters.
So I'm fairly unique in the sense that firearms law
and the use of firearms impacts my working life
and all my private life.
Everything revolves around, everything I do revolves
around fire firearms
and has basically since I've been schooled.
And do you still jump out of helicopters? Yep.
Cool. Okay. So
I'm doing 10 minutes for the pistol club
and then five minutes for myself.
And also I've been asked by the chairman of the
South Island Wild Animal Recovery Operators group
to endeavor to answer any questions you have, um, regarding,
um, Venice and recovery and the use of fire arts.
So in, in that vein, I would just like to say,
what questions have you got for me?
Um, he might be useful, um,
because we'll run both these sessions together.
What do you, what do you really want
that we haven't, haven't done?
So, uh, particularly run your use of semi-automatic Okay.
Your pess.
And it'd be useful to understand what your pests you do.
Okay. And then what, how you use all the rules around that.
Uh, okay. Well, I, I do a lot of contracts,
mainly based ground based on rabbits and goats
and stuff like that with semi automatic
firearms with rifles.
Yeah. And then the Venice and recovery, I work for a pilot
and I, we use semi automatic rifles
and shotguns in the helicopter for pest control
and venison recovery
And to get licenses to do both those pest controls.
You are semi-automatic? What's, what sort of size, um,
Events are there? I I,
I use 20 round magazines.
I've got AR fifteens and I have a PORs license
and I've just gone through the, the p endorsement, um,
reapplication again, currently at two and a half years
and in the app are going to five,
which is a good idea. Right.
So you support that. Yeah,
I, I definitely support that.
And, and the process you've been through,
just having gone through it recently,
It's a bit of a debacle.
Why? Um, basically, so I applied in December.
My license runs out in March. If I hadn't got it renewed.
The day that it runs out, it doesn't roll over.
You have to hand your, this
Is the point earlier. Yeah.
You have to hand your firearms into the police.
Mm-hmm. Okay. I've got mine through.
But the FSA had issues with people
who are doing pest control part what they class as part-time
and they were refusing to grant pest control licenses
for matics to guys that were part-time.
And they became very intrusive into, um, our business,
like wanting to know ammunition, receipts,
written agreements, all sorts, all sorts of, I guess
could be c considered commercially sensitive information
that had no bearing on, on actually running an operation.
Just give us a bit more detail about that. What do you
So, so the guy that was one of my friends
who was part-time and they were trying to block his way, and
You're not part-time?
No, I'm full-time. So
I'm 40. But you're not, you got four
other,
you've got three other roles.
Yep. You could be, you could argue
that you're not full-time.
I'm full-time in p**s control. Mm-hmm.
Right. Okay. Yeah. That's all I do. Okay.
Right. Everything else is when private stuff is, is
So, so the part-time p**s you're referring to
how many hours would they do a week or them couple
Of days. Couple
of days a week? Yeah.
And, and that's deemed to be a part-timer. Okay.
Part-time. Yeah. And they also told him that his company,
for him to have a PE license,
his company had to make a profit.
And he's like, where does that come from?
So in that sense, when you say someone's part-time
or you need to have the right tools for the job,
and it doesn't matter if you're doing one day a week
or seven days a week.
Course, you, you need that, that capability
of having the right tool for the job
and the right tool for the job,
for pest control is a similar automatic rifle
with at least a 20 round magazine.
So we had to push back on the FSA about that
and there was a bit of ruffling of feathers and,
and they, they granted three of them in 10 days,
three people that were having trouble.
And if, if they hadn't processed
or chosen not to process it within the dual time,
they could have made that, uh, part so-called part-time,
20 hours a week, person relinquish their rifle,
their semi-automatic on the day.
So they, they actually have dis discretion
around whether they can, um, you meet the requirement
or not, it's incumbent on themselves.
Yeah. I guess You understand what I said?
Not really, but I mean, Now
what I'm saying is if they had, if the regulator decided
to take longer
to process the application than they thought turf,
they could have taken the person past the due due date
and then say, right, you've now
'cause we haven't issued the license.
Gimme your aid. Yep.
Well, we've had Is that true?
Yeah, they would, we've had that incident with one
of the guys I work with, he applied for his license.
The due date came up
and they sent him an email saying, your license runs out on
tomorrow, you have to hand your license into police.
And I said, don't do anything,
because he had put the application in
and I chased up a few guys in the FSA that I knew and,
and it was their mistake.
And they admitted that they had made a mistake
not doing the processing.
So they actually said to him, look, we'll get your license
through in the next two days,
just put your guns in the safe, don't use them.
Right. But he couldn't work for those couple of days.
And so the, um, the rules,
you talked about them asking about the business,
whether it's making a profit where none of
that's in the legislation or where did that, where
and have you got proof that they did all that sort
Of stuff? Well, I've got emails at home.
Yeah. Mm-hmm.
And what we did is we went back to them
and said, okay, where's the statutory requirement
for you guys to ask those questions?
And we got Andrew Edgecomb involved
and he asked a few questions at a higher level.
Who's Andrew Edge? He was here earlier today
for that anti arms.
Okay. Antique arms from, yeah.
And, and he, and whatever happened in the background, all
of a sudden the problems went away Weaver.
So that was a, that was a win for common sense.
Um, and what I gather from talking to the guy, um, Greg,
who's quite high up in it, I think some of the things
that was happening, he wasn't aware of it.
Right. Okay. Right. Um, any other, yeah, yeah.
Just, just, yeah. A quick one.
So you, you are talking about the,
the challenge in renewing licenses.
Mm-hmm. But surely there's a, you know, a time we all know
I, I forgot to renew my driver's license
and I found out when I went to rent a car,
but I no longer had a, a valid driver's license.
You know, these things happen. Yeah.
And we just have to live with the mistakes when they happen.
Yep. But surely you know
that you've gotta renew it and you do it.
No, you don't. No, you don't. You don't Because you get a
firearms license and it's issued for 10 years.
Okay. Your P license is only
issued for two and a half years.
There's no date anywhere that says when your P license
expires, they're supposed to send you an email.
I never got one, but I was being interviewed for,
for someone else's P license.
So I asked the guy look up when my date is,
and he says, then I'll get right up.
I'll get off straight onto it. Right.
So it's, it's incumbent on us to find out.
So. Okay. So there's just some systems are not working
as well as they could.
Yeah. And actually been reinterpreted too.
Yeah. And reinterpret. So
What's your comment here?
COPC supports removal
or permits to possess by gunsmiths
for short-term repair work?
Yeah, so, so if, if you had like a,
like a semi automatic rifle that meeting a
Repair A, a repair,
and you've gotta go the gunsmith, you've gotta go
through the, he's gotta go to the police
to get a FSA to get a permit.
You've gotta do all the, all the, all the drama
and then you've gotta reverse the permit to, to get it back.
Whereas if you can just go there
and say, can you fix this in the next day or so do it.
Well, we heard about the carriage of rifles
and pistols that been unclear.
So are you allowed to be carrying around an AR 15?
Oh yeah. Yeah. But I mean,
I've got security on my vehicle. Yeah.
So you have a lock. So you're,
you're saying we should streamline the ability for
repairs with, uh, a dealer, I suppose a um, or
Gunsmith A guns, uh, repair, presumably a dealer, would
They? Yeah, they're generally dealers.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah. Generally dealers.
So you, you don't have an issue with carriage,
but you were saying if you,
your gun breaks when you're doing the sheet,
you what's process Now? You go to the new
Regulator, you what?
Well, you'd either, you'd have to go to a permit to possess,
and I'm not sure how long that would take to get the permit.
If you're doing everyth, what you can do is take the part
off and take the part off if it's just a minor part.
So you can remove the part
but not the rifle. But then again, you want
Yeah. As long as it's not the
receiver, it's a receiver
as the actual Yeah.
Registered part, you wouldn't be able to give them
that without doing a permit.
So you want that part streamlined. Yeah.
Makes sense. Right. Okay. Okay. Alright.
The other thing just, um, just, just would be quite good
with regard to pest control is, so you bolt actual rifles
and semi automatic 20 twos are limited
to 10 round magazines.
Shotguns are limited to five rounds.
Yeah. Anything above that,
you've gotta have a P license,
which creates all the paperwork and the issues.
So we had a situation where we went over
to the west coast with a helicopter.
The pilots using his own firearms, which are all p endorsed,
I'm on As, as an employee, he can't use the local shooter
because he's not on his list to be able to use.
Now, if you made the shotguns a 10 round
magazine, same as the rifles, anything under
that is just an acat.
It opens, it saves a lot of paperwork for pest controllers
and having to have a P license
for a seven round shotgun Yeah.
Versus a five. And,
and whilst that two rounds might not sound like a lot,
but when you're doing pest control
and big numbers, those two
or three rounds, you're another
almost 50% more efficient if you're on Yeah.
A mob van. And that would be a good idea. Just
Remind me of a normal pump pump action.
Five rounds. Normally the most come with five.
Only five rounds. Five
Rounds. Yeah. Yep.
Alright. Cool.
Thank you very much for Yeah, the, the other question
stuff in, thank you for waiting all that time. Mm-hmm.
Any other questions? No. Anyone down? Nu come. Right.
Alright. Thank you very much for your time. No worries.
Thanks. Now, um, we are going
to go to hapa Public Institute
of Public Professionals New Zealand.
Thank you very much, chairman. I'm Derek Gil. You Gil.
Very good. I'm just making sure I got the name right.
We used to be called IPAs Institute Public
Administration. So we,
So you've got really flash.
Oh, we've got contemporary,
but we've represented public employees for about that Cool.
For about 90 years.
Thank you, Mr. Gil. Can't wait.
Oh. So thank you very much, um,
for the opportunity to present.
Um, I'm rep, I'm a board member of I of public,
but just so you know, um, my background, I'm a PR academic,
so I spent most of my career as a public servant,
including being a deputy public service commissioner.
So I know quite a lot about
how chief executive performance is pointed
and managed and all that sort of stuff.
I also had a spell on the OECD.
So I've worked quite a lot on, um,
length public government and how that works.
And I was involved in the policy work
around establishing things called departmental agencies,
which is a version of the legal form proposed here.
So I bring some expertise to the table, I think.
So I'm not gonna talk anything about, um, the kind
of the policy issues that have been raised in the bill
because A, there's lots of other people with the expertise
and experience, and b it's not within the remit
of our organization.
Yeah. But we do have concerns about the governance
provisions in the bill.
Right. Uh, and brief,
we think there is a fatal flaw in the governance provisions
of the bill, which the government of the day will come
to regret and there's an opportunity to fix it.
And the fixes, I think are, um,
are complex legally, but simple to do.
Um, we've also got some secondary concerns about
the restriction on sworn officers having delegations,
which just seems to, uh, it's not clear
what the policy rationale for that is.
And it's, it would seem an unusual provision
to include in legislation, uh, if you kind of want
to influence the direction of the organization,
there are other levers rather than locking
something into statute.
So we think that's a, a poor provision,
but I'll spend most of my time on
what the important issue is, which is
how the chief executive of the proposed agency is selected,
appointed and performance managed.
Um, so the kind of the proposal is
that you move from a branded business unit
to a autonomous agency.
Um, there are the kind of, the rationale for
that isn't entirely clear
because the argument is independence,
but that doesn't actually stand up as an argument.
But leaving that aside, um, I'll take is given that the,
there is a move to establish, uh, the business unit
as a standalone agency.
There are some choices in form.
I mean the, this, this,
the standard way we do this in New Zealand generally is
what's called a departmental agency.
And if police were as a department
and within the public service, this would be easy.
You'd just be inserting it in a schedule.
But you can't do that because police
is outside the public service.
So what the drafters seem
to have done is picked up quite a lot of the provisions
that apply to departmental agency,
apart from the most important one, which is
how you select an appoint
and performance management chief executive.
I'm a board chair. I know the single most important thing I
do as the chief executive I've selected
and the chief chief executive I performance manage
everything else is secondary as governors.
So this is the really important one.
Um, and I think what's proposed is really quite unfortunate.
Um, so, um,
normally if it was a departmental agency, the chief,
the public service commissioner would run the process on
behalf of the government.
Uh, if it's a public service appointment, the Minister
of state services would take it to cabinet
and then onto the executive council.
In this case, it's proposed
that the minister responsible do that.
Yeah. Which mean, which could mean
that the appointment process is
run out of the minister's office.
And that is a really bad idea. Go ahead.
Just a point of clarification mm-hmm.
Is the new regulator, what, what's the,
what's the status of the regulator?
Well, at the moment it's a
branded business unit within police.
The proposal is to create a suey generous,
so a a unique standalone entity. Yeah.
And what is the form of that though?
Well, that's would be, um, well,
it would be suey generous,
like the reserve bankers suey generous.
Is that your, is that your Yeah,
Just I think we've, we have, um, heard aspects
of the appointment process, um,
critiqued in this committee already today,
interested in the performance management question.
Because if we have a process like this without a oversight
agency like the board
or the Public Service Commission, what, what, who if you,
um, the CEO's not doing their job, who pulls 'em into line?
Well, the official should answer that question,
but my understanding is that
that would be the responsibility of the minister.
And that is a bad principle.
And I refer you to a case I know very well,
which concerned, um, which was the, um, case
where the, um, uh, the chief executive of Wims, um,
wasn't reappointed by the commissioner,
but if you look at the evidence about
how min ministers went about trying
to influence the performance
of a chief executive, it was not pretty.
And the state ended up in court, the Rankin case.
Yeah, yeah. I thought that's what you're referring to.
So we, so we got a little bit of lack of clarity around
what the exact structure of the new organization's
of the regulator's gonna be.
But what we do know is gonna be a CEO
and it's proposed that the minister points
that you're recommending, that should be on the base
of the Prime Minister to the Governor General.
The key thing is who runs the process? Yeah.
And there's no forward approach.
There's no board on this thing.
So your other option would be, sorry I'm interrupting you.
No, no, no. But I can, it could be,
you could have established as a Crown entity in which in
case you would've a board, I was a
father of the Crown Entities Act.
I can tell you about that stuff,
but I've, I'm taking the organizational form as given.
If you wanna talk about alternative organizational
form, I'm happy to Well,
That was gonna be my question.
Yeah. And, and thanks for your submission
and obviously some more detail in here.
Yeah. Obviously what's trying to be achieved here is,
is have, the regulator is one body
and the enforcer is another.
So are you saying actually a better model?
Would it be to completely remove
the firearm safety authority
and put it, say as an independent Crown entity or,
or something else completely independent,
and then from that follows all of the things
that you are concerned about how
the CEO is appointed in the board, et cetera?
I, I guess I'm being a kind
of a cautious researcher saying, um,
there's very little on the public record
that explains the decisions that have been landed at here.
So I haven't seen the analysis that justifies the choice
of this organizational form.
Right. I, I've actually worked in the firearm space, um,
but I don't know enough about the functions here to be able
to give the committee definitive advice.
There are other options.
My point is, regardless of the options that you choose,
having a minister run the appointment process
and the performance management process is a really bad idea.
I suppose. I was asking a slightly different question,
which is just step back.
You've, you've set, you've outlined all
your governance experience.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. If it was up to you,
if you want this clear denomination between a regulator
and a enforcer, I'm just, yeah.
I mean, I'm not trying to be difficult.
I'm just, so having as a
Separate, there would be three options that I think about.
One would be a Crown entity, and when you,
and then you have a board, and there are some advantages in
having a board in terms of the expertise that that brings.
And the board would appoint the chief executive.
Your second option would be to have a departmental agency,
but put it, say with the Ministry of Ministry
of Department of Just Ministry of Justice.
Yeah. And then you've got that clear separation.
It would simply be a, in a schedule
in the Public Service Act.
And we, I wouldn't be here making
a submission. Yeah. Alright.
I Think that's, and, and the third option is
to create the suey generous body.
Now if you create a suey generous body,
that's exactly why was the sponsor
of the Crown Entities Act, you end up
with these things sitting in isolation and,
and when s**t happens, with all due respect mm-hmm.
Inevitably will, sometime in the life of this organization,
the rules of the game are fundamentally unclear.
If you stick with an existing organizational form,
there's a whole lot of case law, there's a whole lot
of guidance, and there's a whole lot of stuff
that people in central agencies do to get it out of the s**t
so that it doesn't become public.
And when you create a suey generous, um, organization,
which is what you're proposing here,
your your risk is quite high.
If you make the chief executive a political appointment,
you've most probably doubled that risk. It's,
But I think your, your argument is not only the risk
around, and in most cases it'll be okay,
but you, you're saying that there'll be a situation
where it's not and we should, should, uh, factor that in.
So one is the risk around appointing the right CEO,
but the second thing is the ongoing
monitoring of performance.
And because that is probably as crucial as anything.
Um, so that under this situation
with the public service commissioner, even under the sury,
general Ronald Commissioner's
Not involved. So I
Understand and not involved at all.
So there's no independent,
so you've got the minister appointing the CEO
and then minister monitoring the CEO.
So you think about the
teacher's council's case at the moment.
Yeah. How does that play out? Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
So essentially you are, you're suggesting
that a political appointment then opens up
a whole raft of risk
and is an exceptional move given our our
standard public service approach.
I'm, I'm saying yes on multiple dimensions.
For example, it will reduce the talent pool.
You can recruit from who would want
to put their name forward for a job where you'll be tainted
as a political appointee
and likely to be at risk with a change of government.
And statistically at the moment, you've got 50,
50% chance of a change of government.
Yeah, yeah. Arithmetic.
Statistically governments last, between administrations last
between six and nine years.
Yeah. So, you know, you want to pursue
to last for at least six years.
So there's another argument.
So what everyone says it's wrong,
that the minister should do it is to, Mr.
Stevenson's pointed out earlier in today, um, none
of no appointment in any government role.
It has to go through, you know, the cabinet committee
and then it goes to cabinet Of course.
So there isn't level of oversight,
but even moving to your model where the appointments
through the go through the Prime Minister
to the Governor General, um, that sounds better.
But in reality it's probably, oh, you're saying
that's better because then it's, uh,
independently run process by the Prime Minister.
It's through the Public
Service. Public Service Commission
runs the process.
They run the job search, they run the interview process,
they run the shortlist to long listing.
They, they, and they,
and you, you engage the minister along the way through.
Yeah. It's not completely at arm's length of ministers,
but once the commissioner has made a recommendation,
cabinet has an up down vote on that.
And if cabinet turns that recommendation down,
parliament has to be advised.
So in the history of the current regime,
that's only happened once.
So there's a real discipline
around the quality of appointments.
Okay. I mean, to, to illustrate the degree of independence
I worked indirectly
and then directly to someone called Mark Preble,
his brother, he was appointed
by the, A Labor Prime Minister.
His brother was the leader of act. Yeah.
Mark was a complete professional, had complete confidence
of the Prime Minister because it had been run
through an independent merit-based process.
This legislation would not enable that to happen.
So even if you have a very competent person in the role,
an incoming government is likely to be extremely suspicious
of them with good reason.
So you just to draw this to a close, your recommendation,
assuming that we're gonna have the sur uh, body or not, is,
but assuming that then it should be, um,
your recommendation, it should be an, the appointment
of the CE should be by way of the government by way
of the Prime minister, vice the government chairman,
because that means the public service involved
And then the Public Service commissioner runs the process.
Yeah. That's your recommendation. Alright, cool.
We got that very clear. Any other points?
Oh, just on the, um, yeah, the,
I don't understand why you would want to limit the pool of
who you recruit from police and the fire
and the regulatory agency is gonna have
to work really closely together.
That's gonna require, require trust and confidence.
I can't think of a better way of having trust
and confidence than having things like secondments
and people that have worked in one
service working in the other.
Why would you preclude that?
And particularly why would you preclude
that in legislation mm-hmm.
Where it's locked in place.
So I just think that's a, a, a, you know,
you might wanna move the agency away from the police.
That's something you can do by way
or of a, of letter of expectation.
But I wouldn't, not rec never recommend something like that.
Legislation. Mm-hmm.
Right. Hey, thank you very much
for your conversation today.
That's, um, excellent. Very helpful. Righto.
Um, we are now going to
target shooting club John Wilson by Zoom.
John, you there? Were you able to join us?
Hello? Good afternoon. Sorry I
Had a hiccup up my End.
No, no problem. We've got 10 minutes. Okay. Thank you.
Um, so le leave a few minutes for us
to ask some questions. That'd be great.
Okay. Thank you. Uh,
A lot of what I've got to say has already been
Covered, covered, but I will, um, uh, run
through it all again quickly.
I'm reading from a script, so apologies if it
sounds a bit stilted.
Uh, right. Firstly, thank you for the opportunity to submit.
Uh, my name is John Wilson.
I'm the secretary treasurer
of the Hora Target Shooting Club.
We are a small bore rifle target shooting club.
We've been in operation since 1936.
We own and operate an indoor range building
and attach club rooms that are located
in a recreational reserve.
Our submission is that we are generally in support
of the proposed bill.
Um, we're happy for the firearm safety authority
to be separate to the police.
Uh, we've been dealing with the FSA to register,
the club certify the range,
and it all was sort of very professionally done.
The current 10 year
and five year period between firearms license
renewals is a good compromise.
We see no reason to change except the proposed extension
to even out the workload for the regulator.
Uh, the current 16 year age limit for applying
for firearms license seems about right.
Uh, where am I? Sorry.
Uh, now we don't see a need for a minimum age
for someone shooting under supervision in our club.
Those that shoot without a firearms license are supervised
by a club member that does that.
Supervising person's quite able to make a determination
of whether a young person is mature enough to shoot.
We normally base our decision to allow them
to shoot on physical size
and maturity rather than just an age.
Now, there's a next couple of items have been suggested.
They're not in the legislation, but I'll mention them.
It's been suggested
that all firearms license holders must join a shooting club.
If this was to happen, our club would be overwhelmed
with new members that probably had no interest
in belonging to a club.
Uh, please don't limit the number
of firearms a person can possess.
Our club owns firearms
and those firearms have to be registered to club members.
A restriction on numbers will likely mean we may not have
enough club members that are able to register rifles
after they register their own.
Please don't put a limit on the amount
of ammunition someone can purchase or be in possession of.
Our club purchases over 20,000 rounds a year from various
suppliers, and it's not unusual to buy up
to 15,000 rounds at a time.
Now I've got some specific clauses I'd like to comment on.
Uh, clauses 49, B one and 49 B two.
These clauses are about clubs supplying MO to those
that don't have a firearm license for use at our range.
Now that's in the legislation
and these that to stay on, these are essential
for our club to operate.
Uh, next item, 1, 3 2, production of a firearms license.
If you are unable to produce a firearm license on demand
to a, to a policeman, you can produce it within seven days.
Uh, as written, the location for this is to be determined
by the police officer you're dealing with.
This could mean a lengthy drive for some of our members.
We are, we're in a rural situation.
Uh, perhaps we could just produce the
license at any police station.
Uh, clause 2 1 8, uh,
non pistols shooting club must be enrolled, uh,
six month prison or $10,000 fine.
Uh, seems excessive for
what really could be a clerical issue.
Um, our club, we keep track of it,
but I mean, it could slip through the cracks.
Now, would a club officer
or uh, the club be financially liable?
Would this mean a club officer risks imprisonment?
The problem we've got with
that is if a club officer is liable,
then it makes it very hard to find people to volunteer
to become an officer at the club.
Uh, clause 2 1 9.
Um, non pistol shooting club must be an incorporated society
in certain circumstances.
Our club, and we expect most clubs sell ammunition regularly
in firearms occasionally.
And we are an incorporated society,
but there's no firearm safety gain
for having clubs being corporate socks.
It's more about fundraising and financial accounting.
We recommend all clubs be incorporated societies
for the safety of the club assets, not
because of firearm safety.
Clause 2, 3 6, application for enrollment
of non pistol shooting range.
Uh, that's 2 3 6 2 C two.
This is a really, could be a really nasty one for us.
The clause is about getting all necessary
territorial authority and council consents to operate, uh,
our club is, and a recreational reserve.
This could be an absolute nightmare.
Uh, the worry we have is that if we were to approach council
and ask for a consent to operate, we could end up
with a paperwork nightmare.
Councils could easily take their requirement
to ensure safety in a recreational reserve to the extreme.
So we are, we are up and running
and the council are well aware who we are.
We are just worried about, uh, that clause.
Uh, this has been right, the clause 2, 4, 2 inspections
of shooting clubs and ranges.
I've heard this already mentioned today.
The clause states inspections at any place
where club firearms or ammunition are stored.
Our club firearms
and ammunition are routinely stored off the club premises
by club members at their own property.
Does that mean when the club is inspected,
the police come to our homes?
Um, I think that needs to be clarified.
Clause 2 5 3 unlawfully carrying
or possession of standard
firearms, et cetera, in a public place.
We do that every time we go to our club.
We are in a recreational reserve.
We park in the car park next to the building
and we walk across.
Um, having the shooter in this situation prove a lawful
purpose, uh, under clause 2, 5, 3, 2,
uh, it's unreasonable.
There's a club we visit occasionally in Christchurch.
Uh, it's in a residential area.
There's almost no off street parking.
You have no option
but to park on the street, pull your f firearm out,
walk down the street with it.
So it's a pro, it's a worry.
Um, and my final comment is about the arms registry.
Um, we are just a little concerned about security
and the fact is that the club won't be on it.
The, it'll be club members, uh, looking
after a club firearms.
So that was, that's the end of my submission.
Uh, happy to answer questions.
Well, you've got a lot in there.
Thank you. Right. Uh, Ms. Arena Williams.
Thank you very much, John.
Thank you, um, for your submission.
Um, I just wanted to clarify your helpful point around, um,
what would be a normal amount of ammunition for one
of your club members to buy if
they were to buy a large amount?
Can you just expand for the committee on, um,
what you might expect, um, for someone who was stocking up,
um, but for this completely legitimate purpose? Yep.
The, the 15,000 rounds that I spoke about is
what we bought last year,
and I've just recently bought 5,000.
Uh, you, you get a,
you get a better price if you buy in bulk.
Um, and we've, our suppliers
historically have been a little unreliable.
Um, so we, we like to carry 15 or 20,000 rounds.
When we get, when we drop
below 15,000 rounds in stock, we get a little nervous.
So we start hunting rounds.
So we've bought 15,000 rounds recently,
and that's not outta the ordinary.
And for most clubs, that wouldn't be out of the outta the,
So does that, what is the specification on
the, uh, legislation?
What's 9,000? No, there is no lift.
I don't think there is. What? There is a one.
So you can buy 15,000. Yeah.
So there's no restriction on that? No. Okay. So that's fine.
There is on a hazardous good grounds,
but that's more weight and
Explosives rather. So
we are worrying about
something that we don't need to worry about. No.
There, there, there was a, a, a
small discussion about it possibly,
but going into the register,
But they, but it wasn't stopped.
That stopped. So we don't need to worry about, um,
number of firearms.
You, your very first point.
So as a, as a personal owner, firearms owner,
I can own more than six, uh, rifles or shotguns.
Is the six that you're talking about, is that in reference
to the club when you said you posed a
limit on the number of firearms?
That's Australia Worry about Australian
legislation don't brought to New Zealand,
But it hasn't been brought in.
No. So again, we're not,
we're worrying about something we don't need to worry about.
There was someone earlier this morning
that in hear submission has suggested it. Yeah.
But yeah. But that was, that was for people who, uh, uh,
professional shooters taking people out on the hill.
Yeah. Okay. So we don't need to worry about those.
Get their TLA liability to the officials.
We heard that back in two th 2000
whenever it was, um, of liability.
So what is the, if you are, if you're
the president of your local club, John, you,
are you liable or is it just the arms officer on the day?
Who's overseeing how, where does that liability lie?
I don't know. But what I do know is that the club
owns firearms but are registered to club members
who have a firearms license.
So the clause reads,
a per a person commits an offense is low, well, blah, blah,
blah, carries a standard firearm
or possesses a standard firearm.
So quite why I would read that as whoever is, uh,
registered to the firearm or looking
after it for the day at the club.
Okay. It, um,
that's one thing I we really haven't got lot clarity.
Clarification of the liability as an issue.
Um, then we probably need
to understand that a little bit more.
Um, you raised the issue about right to inspect homes if,
uh, if, uh, authority can come in
and check your club, it raises their prospect.
Should they be able to also go to the home.
We had that early on today
that people shouldn't be able to turn up to your home.
Yes. Um, and the section 2 5 3
is a bit of a worry, isn't it?
So is that, again, is that, is that a, you know,
most people go hunting.
What if I go hunting
and I take my rifle with me, I walk down the street,
I'm not gonna get arrested at might.
So what's the, what's the, I just trying
to understand Clause 2, 5 3.
How does that, how in
what circumstances does that that apply?
I'm not sure. I just, the legislation says
Mm-hmm.
I don't have that the whole thing open.
It talks about, it has a, it has a, a fine
and a prison sentence attached
to being in possession and a public place.
And it's, and it seems very, but
If you, if you're a registered firearm owner
and you walk down the street
and you are, um, uh, you're carrying a rifle,
I presume you can't walk around
with a loaded gun down the street.
No. But you, if you're walking down
with your ba your gun case with two locks on it.
Um, so again, I don't quite understand what your point is.
Um, sorry, I'm just trying to draw out
what you mean by this.
Sorry.
There had been a, um, an incident in the past
where a person walking down the street in Christchurch
with an ear gun and a gun bagg, um, amounted
to an armed offender's call out
and he was pushed to the ground trying
to find out why he was walking down the road
with a gun and a gun bagg.
So I think the concern, um, is who chooses
that it is a lawful purpose.
In my particular case, I'm a gun dealer
and my previous premises had no off street
parking. So people often,
Of course, every time you go do a gun shop, walked
Across the road with a gun.
Yeah. But, but I'd be like to get more
form view if we have to on that.
Because otherwise that means that no one can carry a gun
and, and well rifle pistol in public.
Alright. Hey, thanks John. Did you have a question?
Well, no, it's more to, more to that point that I think,
I mean I think we've all carried rifles into gun shops.
Yeah. Not getting arrested left on center because that,
because that's what we have to do.
It was call out new Plymouth where a member
of the public saw someone take a gun bag out of the back
of the car, walk into a shop, ring the police,
the shop was a gun dealer.
All But that's not someone risk. No, that's,
You be able to quantify why that happened.
Yeah. But I guess it's the concern.
Make sure that the, but are we jumping?
Sounds like we're jumping at shadows a little bit.
So Righto. I'm gonna bring that to a close.
Thank you Mr. Wilson. I really appreciate your time.
Thank you very much.
Okay. Right now we're going
to Mr. Chapman from Magnum Imports.
We're a bit behind schedule. How did that happen?
Yeah, I lost time over there. Good afternoon.
Yeah. Um,
I have answered a number of, um,
sections in, in my submission.
I don't want to talk to all of them.
As a little bit of background.
Uh, just up front, I've been a licensed firearms owner
for 42 years.
Um, I've been a licensed dealer for 14 years.
I'm an endorsed pistol shooter
and I've shot competitively for 20 years.
Um, I've been club secretary of two clubs for about 10 years
and I'm also the section director for the Cowboy Action, um,
section of Pistol New Zealand.
So I've got quite a wide range of experience with firearms.
Um, I have some particular comments
in regards to being a dealer.
Um, and I suppose the first one is the
general feeling as a licensed dealer.
And the dealers I've talked to, we've always felt
that we were part of the safety net within the legislation
of keeping firearms out of unlawful hands.
Um, we worked with our local arms officers
and our local police
and on a number of occasions I've raised concerns about
specific people passed them on for them to
investigate the changes.
After the March 15th incident tended to treat me
as a shooter, me as a competitive pistol shooter,
and me as a dealer, as someone dodgy
and should be, um, further
investigated at the drop of a head.
I've had two emails from firearm safety advising,
for example, that transfers
of guns aren't complete that I've done.
You try and ring them, you get on a, uh, answer phone.
You know, the letter also states
that I could see a $10,000 fine.
I could be imprisoned, I could lose my dealer's license.
The only information on the email is a transaction number.
When I ring up, they won't tell me what the transaction is.
I move about 500 guns a year.
So in any one to two month period,
that's a considerable amount of transactions.
Both cases, once I manage to eek out of them what,
what the transaction was,
because they said they couldn't tell me for privacy reasons,
I was able to give them the details, which your records,
which showed that I had actually done a dealer transfer.
It's the problem with the bureaucratic nature of some
of the relations.
So when we look at a few of the key clauses in here,
one that, um, is of particular interest to me in, uh,
is the clause about key terms
and it states that possess in relation to anything means
number D occupying.
And I've cut out some of the words, occupying a place
where the thing is found.
Uh, as a father of three children
and of four children, sorry.
And also my wife has two children.
Two of those children at various times have stayed with us
because of issues in marriage and relationship.
Potentially they could be as non-licensed people,
someone could interpret that they are in possession
of my firearms.
I don't know. I assume this is aimed at someone in
possession of unlawfully of a firearm in a house
and criminal intent.
But you have to be careful that as it's worded,
that's what it implies.
The second one has been talked about a little bit
before about the transfer of restricted or prohibited items.
And I do have an endorsement to sell, um, um,
restricted pistols.
My problem is that I'm a dealer but I'm not a gunsmith.
I have a number of gunsmiths that I work with
and they specialize in different areas.
Uh, and a couple of them do not want to deal with the public
for their own safety.
You know, often they work in their
garage out the back of their house.
They don't want Joe public going to their house. Mm.
So what happens is the public bring the firearm to me,
I take it, I contact the dealer, he come, uh,
the gunsmith he comes into, it works on it, brings it back.
This new clause will mean that for all rifles
and shotguns that are a category, we can now do
that lawfully without having to enter
into the register every time you've given a seven day.
Well the suggestion is a seven day period for pistols.
That's not long enough.
Sometimes, um, a person can bring me an item for repair,
gunsmith can pick it up that afternoon, little repair,
I get it back the next afternoon.
Other times they're looking for parts
and it will take longer.
So what would you recommend?
Well, it should be the same as the 30 days for anyone else.
And this was something I was actually involved in testing
the register when it first came out along
with a few other businesses.
And this was something we specifically asked
because of the time periods.
The other suggestion with this particular clause is
that it only says it's for repair or modification.
It should actually be for any purpose
that they bring it into my shop.
I get customers bringing items in for me to value either
because they want me to buy them off them or
because they may wanna put them on the market.
Sometimes that valuation requires research.
Um, and what about if you're selling on behalf of
and if I'm selling on behalf, then
that's gonna be more than days.
So the legal process is supposed
to be, you come to me, you say,
I've got these pistols, I want to sell 'em.
Or I've got these guns. And I go, okay, um,
we have a quick look in the shop while I've got other
customers, while I've got phone calls, et cetera.
And I'm trying to talk to them about the value
of their guns without letting the other customers in the
shop know what I'm gonna pay for them.
They take them away. I then have to get a permit.
They then come back
because of the nature of we do a lot of odd older
military style or historic guns.
People are bringing guns for me to sell from as far away
as new Plymouth and the South island.
That's two or three trips and transactions.
They should be able to bring it to me, leave it with me.
We do the deal, we sort it out. Yeah. Okay.
Second one is in the licenses
and approvals, I dunno the exact clause
it talks about every application for a firearms license must
be accompanied by a criminal record check of the applicant
for every country other than New Zealand,
which they have stayed for over six months,
not necessarily consecutively in the previous 10 years.
And I see this impacting people in a number of ways.
I've got a friend in the south island that runs
safari tours in Africa every year.
So over a 10 year period, he's probably out of the country
for a year or more.
And he probably visited multiple countries in Africa.
I would have doubts that you could contact one person in
that country to get any um, criminal record statement
that would satisfy the regulator.
We have a pistol shooter in the cowboy section
who is an Australian citizen.
New Zealand citizen has houses in both countries.
He lives in New Zealand for six months of the year.
He lives in Australia for six months of the year, one year.
And he's got to advise every place he's been in Australia.
Uh, I've worked with organ, um,
government organizations in Australia.
And the reality is the states don't talk to each other.
So you're gonna have to talk
to every state and get a record.
We also, in the cowboy section have a family that
religiously go to the world champs in
America every two years.
Their 18-year-old son was the world champion last year.
Every time they go they tend
to include some business dealings and some holiday.
So over a number of years, they would easily break
for six months under this clause.
They would have to go not just to every state,
but potentially every little town
or area in America they visited.
'cause even in the state of Texas,
there would not be a central place
that had all the criminal records for every jurisdiction.
So my suggestion is that this word must,
should be replaced with may the same as parliament.
When you're doing your top secret checks, you are looking
for the red flag places that you've been, you know,
someone's visiting Australia and has people there.
Australia's not really a red flag state.
If they'd gone to Iran, Iraq, Afghanistan, you might start
to question why they've been there.
So can I just ask a question for clarification?
So they they still need to state where they've been. Yes.
But, but only if the firearms authority then ask them. Yes.
Okay. So you're basically saying you still
have the list everywhere you've been.
But if, yeah, because the way Afghanistan,
you might have to provide the
Way it's written before they put the application in.
They've gotta get something in writing from every place.
Okay. And that might be a nightmare. Yeah.
All right. That makes sense. Okay. Thank you.
Good, good suggestion. Right. What's next?
Clause two 30 is talking about
certification granted subject to conditions.
And it's talking about certification
for a pistol shooting range
and clause D of SEC subsection two states,
um, that
Competitions that may be
Conducted, sorry, if you read two,
certification is granted subject
to any conditions the chief executive considers.
So clause D is saying that the chief executive can tell us
what competitions we may conduct at our range.
The chief executive wouldn't have a clue about
our competitions.
And, but there is already rules in place about
what firearms we can shoot, about
what ammunition we can use, about
what directions we shoot about what targets
and all of those about creating a safe envelope on
that range for use of firearms.
This seems to allow the CEO to say,
I don't care whether you are safe
or not, I don't want you to do it.
So tell me this, is there any circumstances
with poorly run, uh, ranges,
and let's assume there are, you've got lots of 'em.
Several hundred. Um, would there be any circumstances
where you would expect the CEO to be able
to have a discretion about to do this?
No, because if the range is poorly run,
it's already breaking some rules
and those rules would've consequences.
So what you, what you're enabling here is adding another
layer where it almost seems without any reason they can say
you can't do this again.
Like I said earlier, um, wording is important
and you're just, it's just adding another layer
of bureaucracy into existing legislation.
All right. Cool. Right. What else?
There's one other time, there's one other consideration.
Um, under licensing, my wife
and I are both competitive pistol shooters.
We're both cowboy action shooters.
We shoot different types of cowboy guns.
I shoot black powder, she shoots other guns.
They're both stored in the same safe.
We both have the same vetting.
Our guns are in the same security
under the current legislation.
I can't take her guns out of the safe
because I choose to change my, um, my
discipline for the day and go
and shoot them at a legal range.
I can't carry them.
'cause you're not, you're not qualified.
No, because they're licensed to her,
Her, It, it would be like you
and your wife both having a car in the same garage.
Yeah. And you're only allowed to drive your car.
And one day she says, can you go and get the groceries?
But you say your, your permit
or your license will save
for black powder only save for black powder.
It it only lists my guns, my guns.
So there should be an ability for them to be jointly owned
by a couple or a, in our case, a married couple.
That makes sense. And they used to be enabled
by the local arms officer.
It was probably a little bit gy.
They'd keep a spreadsheet,
but they'd know that we live together, the guns are safe,
they've inspected our security.
We're both competitive,
we're both fulfilling all the requirements.
So some ability for firearms to be jointly owned.
Right. Cool. Now, any questions? No. Good submission.
Very good. Thank you very much. Um, thank you.
We've heard a lot of points today,
so don't obviously you know what's been going on.
So thank you very much for a great submission.
Right now we're on to the New Zealand Cartridge
Collectors Club Zoom.
Mr. Walsh,
you there Mr. Walsh?
She on the, it's his name is there.
But Mr. Walsh, are you there?
Oh, you are unmuted. I just can't hear you. Hi, yes.
Can you hear me? Just, just you might have, sorry.
Yeah, that's a bit better. Okay.
Okay. Good afternoon. Thank you.
Um, I'm here representing the, uh,
New Zealand Cartridge Collectors Club.
Uh, we're the second oldest such club in the world, uh,
and have been operating since 1961.
So, um, over 65 years.
So we have over 300 members,
including about 50 overseas members, um, whose interest is,
and you know, their hobby is collecting ammunition,
but it's also about preserving historically important items
and researching and publishing regarding the development
and history of ammunition.
The key thing that I want to get across here today is
with regard to, uh, the arms bill
that effectively now bans the possession of ammunition
that's defined to be restricted.
So restricted ammunition, um,
or what was called prohibited ammunition is special purpose
ammunition such as tracer, um, MultiPro,
projectile ette and the likes.
So clause 37 states
that a person may not have in their position
any restricted ammunition.
So I'm requesting on behalf of our club
that an allowance be made for the continued collection
of restricted ammunition by bonafide collectors.
Um, as was provided for following the changes made
to the Arms act in 2019.
I wanna give you a little bit of a generalized background
about what cartridge collecting is about
and I think it might help give some context.
So as a collector, we typically curate cartridges
of many different calibers
and collect different types
of ammunition from different countries, different periods
or different types, including some of the categories
of prohibited ammunition.
These collections are typically displayed in shallow drawers
of cabinets and stored within secure rooms.
They pose no realistic threat or harm to the public.
If someone were to break into the secure room,
they're very unlikely to be able
to identify which cartridges are restricted or prohibited.
They're not labeled as tracer multipurpose,
multi projectile or whatever.
To be able to identify
what special purch purpose each cartridge has.
They would need to be very well informed as to how
to identify them.
Even many cartridge collectors have difficulty identifying
some special purpose ammunition.
Um, so when placed in a collection,
prohibited ammunition does not present any realistic threat
as a source of harm.
Collections typically contain many different calibers
and there may be prohibited ammunition within, um,
a collection for each caliber ammunition
of a particular caliber is only able
to be fired in a firearm of that particular caliber.
Um, so within a particular collection,
there may be very few cartridges that are of interest
to a criminal for say,
because they only use cartridges of the caliber
of the firearm that they might, um, illegally possess.
Some examples of prohibited
or restricted ammunition may be even
of such an obscure caliber
or rear caliber that it's highly unlikely
that any person other than perhaps a specialist firearms
collector would have a firearm of the correct caliber.
I just wanna give you an example of why this sort
of thing is historically important
and also particularly important to New Zealand.
Um, we go back to the early 19 hundreds of gentleman,
by the way, name of John Pomeroy.
Read an article about the development
of the Zeppelin airship, um, and by Germany
and predicted that
that would be a force if we were ever at war.
Um, it was quite, uh, a good prediction by him.
And sure enough, uh, during World War I,
the Zeppelins became a major force
and carried out significant bombing
of the English population, uh, with great loss of life.
Zeppelins were notoriously difficult to bring down
by conventional anti-aircraft fire.
What Mr. Pomeroy developed even
before World War I was, um, was a cartridge that could lead
to the destruction of his Zeppelin airships.
The ammunition that he developed is currently defined
as prohibited and will be defined as restricted.
The abdo, the abdo, sorry. The adoption of Mr.
Pomeroy's invention and its use in bringing down Zeppelin
bombers dramatically altered the course of
that aspect of the war.
After the war, Mr.
Pomeroy was awarded a special prize of 25,000 pounds,
which is a small fortune in those days,
and he was also reportedly offered a knighthood.
So those sort of, um, acknowledgements,
emphasize the importance of his invention
and examples of the Pomeroy cartridge are now very rare
and command very high prices.
So we're talking about items
that are well over a hundred years old
and of great local historical interest.
And I guess I'm asking you, please don't allow these
to be confiscated
and destroyed, which is really what the intention
of the arms bill is at the moment.
What was the outcome of it, I should say,
regarding restricted ammunition?
I would particularly like to bring to your attention the
sequence of events leading up to the preparation
of this bill and seek a change to ensure ongoing trust
and confidence and compliance with the system.
Prior to 2019, all types of conventional ammunition
included, including what was later defined as prohibited,
could be freely purchased and traded.
Some of this ammunition, such
as tracer ammunition was even purchased from the government
as surplus to military holdings.
Following the changes to the Arms Act in 2019,
certain ammunition was defined as prohibited,
but thankfully there was a provision.
There was, there was foresight in the, in the preparation of
that act, there was provision for collectors to apply to be
recognized as a person who may possess prohibited
small arms ammunition.
So many of collectors applied to be recognized
and were indeed recognized.
Those who were approved
to be bonafide collectors were also asked
to provide an inventory of prohibited ammunition.
So in summary, those wishing
to possess prohibited ammunition were identified to police
and all prohibited ammunition in New Zealand was
subsequently declared to police.
So as a result of this process, all prohibited ammunition
and private ownership was ring-fenced
by this process implemented in 2019.
If the changes proposed, then the arms bill are retained so
as not to allow anyone
to have in their position any restricted ammunition.
This means there's been developed a process which I would
describe as very cynical.
The process is demanded the identification of the owners
of prohibited ammunition, then it is created a register
of all the prohibited ammunition they possess.
And now that this personal
and private information has been collated,
a process has now been formulated
to confiscate this ammunition without any appeal
or opportunity for redress.
I think this sets a dangerous precedent.
We live in a world where there's a lingering distrust
of government actions such as
that just outlined could greatly undermine the trust
and confidence and potentially compliance.
All firearms license holders who are fit
and proper persons will always comply
with the requirements of the law.
But a good law should be one that we understand the purpose
of makes good sense is based on good evidence
to justify any change.
And it will be an effective response
to address a known risk.
The Arms Bill is presently stated,
does not meet these requirements, in my opinion,
regarding the limitations imposed on restricted ammunition.
Oh, right. Any more? Mr. Walsh? We're running outta time.
Uh, okay. Um, I think it's less than eight minutes.
I've just been giving, so yeah,
I need, want some questions though?
Sure. Do you wanna carry on or get right?
No, let's take some questions.
I think this is really important.
So let's get bottom of this,
Duncan.
Yeah. Um, just in terms of the AM collection
of ammunition, um, as I understand it, none
of this ammunition would be
prohibited if it didn't have any propellant in it.
So the Gump powder and pro, you know,
Gump powder was removed.
Does that change your submission
or you, as part of what you are wanting to do
to keep essentially live AM ammunition?
Right, so that is, yes. Live ammunition.
So it's in its original form.
So to remove propellant you have to remove the projectile,
which does alter the, you know, the seating
of the projectile and the likes.
Um, I think within the act there's actually a, a workaround
where you could pro, you could remove the projectile
and that it therefore becomes not a cartridge anymore.
That's kind of a nonsense in a way.
I think you've actually really gotta address
what is the risk associated
with a collection of this ammunition.
And I would argue it's very low.
Yeah. I mean if we think about it, you know,
something like trace ammunition, it's quite a danger,
quite a dangerous, um, item.
What's the harm in, say, requiring the propellant
to be removed for collection,
But how are you gonna fire it?
Well, no, it's not for firing, it's for collection.
You're not allowed to fire it.
We, once we got, I'm aware of that. Yeah.
You're not allowed to fire. But,
But I guess I'm asking about striking the balance here.
When you are wanting to collect quite, you know, this
ammunition, which is restricted, restricted
'cause it's got a particular danger associated with it.
What is the harm in requiring the propellant to be removed?
There is some danger in removing some tracer type
projectiles because they can, um, once exposed
to the air can ignite.
So that would be something you might not want to do,
obviously wouldn't want to do.
Okay. So I would, it's much safer
to keep us an attack cartridge.
Okay. We've got Mr. Todd Simson.
I just wanna be clear. So you're basically saying
as it is today, you've got these collectors, there's kind
of an exemption actually everyone knows where they are.
Yeah. Um, so you are saying it's working well,
and my question was gonna be, yeah.
Have there been any issues in the last couple
of years in relation to ammunition collectors?
Firstly, that was my first question.
The answer is no. Great.
And so you're just asking the committee
to basically keep the status quo for these people
and have a carve out?
That's exactly what we're after.
We, whilst we, it's not the best situation,
I think it's certainly one we can keep living
with is the current situation. Yeah. So
Just a, just a slight,
because, um, is there a clear definition around mo
because if you're talking 3 0 3 for a infield rifle, um,
under a collective stuff that would be available,
but a lot of people have three oh threes still for hunting.
So where do you draw the line
between what's still commonly in use
and what's, you know, uh, um,
that would've been used in a weapon, uh,
that you know's not very, very readily available?
'cause it's got very rare or whatever. What's from,
From a collecting valuable point,
value point of view, you mean? Or,
Well, how do you differentiate?
Because if you, if you had collectors with huge suppliers
of 3 0 3, people would have concerns with that.
But if you've got specific types from a musket
or, you know, old, old form of rifle, that's very rare
and put in your drawer in a safe area,
that's a different kettle of fish.
So where do you draw the line between what is deemed
to be antique or, you know, um, less, less potent than,
than, uh, having sort of, um, ammunition
that's much more readily used, even current day sitting.
Um, I'm not sure I really understand your question,
but I just don't see it as a collector.
We don't see it that way. I think, you know, old ammunition
of a very common caliber like 3 0 3, it's not even
that common these days, but that, you know, that's still
of great collecting value.
Um, shooting ammunition for hunting typically is,
has no great col um, collecting interest,
but it's still a variety that people might well collect.
But, um, sporting, uh, sporting ammunition isn't, uh, one
of the restricted, um, types of ammunition.
So under the status quo, is it quite clear
where the boundaries are and what you can collect for
and what you can't collect for?
Yes. We presume it is,
It's the special purpose of the cartridge that creates it
to be defined as restricted or prohibited. Alright.
Hey, thank you for your time Now, um,
we presume we're gonna use your time.
We've used your time for, um, at four 30 as well. Mr. Walsh.
Thank you. And there'll be an
opportunity to carry on. Thanks.
All right. Thank you very much.
Right now we're gonna go to the Willin branch,
the Dear Stalkers, you're here now.
We missed two lots of dear stalkers while we had one,
but we didn't get time to ask some questions,
so we heard the earlier submission today.
Sure. Um, hopefully you're going to allow us
to ask some questions.
All right. Um, so I'm Tom McAllen.
I'm president of the Wellington branch of the NCDA.
I've been in that position for the last three years.
Um, thanks for the chance to talk to you guys today, um,
on behalf our branch.
Um, I, I know that you've, uh, heard the background of NZDA
and what we do from, um,
Urlo this morning, so I won't go into that.
But, um, our Wellington branch has, uh,
just over 300 members, um, making it one
of the larger organi, uh, larger branches in New Zealand.
Um, our Wellington branch is quite unique in
that we're based in an urban center.
Our club room's just a couple hundred meters away up the
road here, close to the Wellington CBD.
And this means we have quite a diverse membership, um,
ranging from people who grew up on farms, familiar
with hunting, um, all the way through to sort of townies,
for lack of a better word, who,
who just are interested in hunting, wanna become familiar
with, with hunting and firearms,
and reach out to us for that sort of education
and training and, and involvement.
Um, the, the culture of our branch revolves
around monthly meetings, getting members together, um,
our shooting range over in, uh,
Hardy Valley over in the western outskirts of,
of Wellington over the hill here.
Uh, regular club hunts and events,
and our Hunter training program, um, also known as Hunts.
All of these functions are facilitated by club volunteers,
some of whom give hundreds of hours of their time a year
to foster the recreation of hunting
and shooting in Wellington in a way that ultimately improves
and contributes to public safety
for the wider Wellington community.
Uh, so for our submission, we are generally supportive
of the bill and taking our written submission as read, um,
including that of the national organization.
Um, and I, I'd just like to touch on one
of the recommendations in our, um, submission with regards
to the regulation of non-ST Rangers.
So I just want to emphasize the importance
of our shooting range as a core bra, core part
of our branch's function and contribution to public safety.
Um, in the Wellington region, it allows hunters and shooters
and our membership to undergo firearm safety education
and training and practice shooting.
It's been used by competitive
shooters, national representatives.
Um, it's, it's enabled training for, um,
local community groups such as, uh, scouts, um,
and also the Wellington Zoo staff.
Um, previously the police and the Army have also used it,
and it's central to the operation of our, um,
our local Hunts program where we, um, train new hunters
with knowledge and skills required to be safe,
responsible, ethical hunters.
So just last weekend we had 14 new Hunts trainees up at the
range under supervision of our volunteer hunts instructors,
um, all, all learning to shoot good groups and,
and to, to go out hunting the following weekend.
Um, and some of those people wouldn't have touched the
firearm, um, you know, um, until just recently.
So, um, that's sort of the training that we're offering.
Um, access to the range is a primary reason that, uh,
many members join our branch, given the limited use, uh,
limited opportunities for, um, use of safe use
of rifles in Wellington's urban environment.
Um, so it goes a long way
to preventing local hunters from siding
and rifles in areas that aren't appropriate, um,
such as on public land.
Um, we submit that the proposed legislation relating
to non pistols rangers be removed from the bill.
Over the last five years, we've experienced firsthand
how unnecessarily difficult it is
to operate lawfully since the changes, uh, changes
to the clubs and rangers regime in 2020 to become compliant
with the initial change in regulations relating
to shooting clubs and rangers required us
to spend almost $12,000, um,
and involved, uh, hundreds of hours of volunteer time.
So it's been an expensive, laborious
and encompassing undertaking that has distracted our,
our branch and its volunteers away from our core functions,
um, with what we perceive
as no being no added safety, safety benefit.
Um, and we already voluntarily ran things in a way
that were standard or, um, equivalent
or exceeding what would've been required by regulation.
We, we were in a fortunate situation
where we had financial resources
and within our committees to professional expertise,
which enabled us to facilitate becoming certified
and, and, and compliant.
But our fair is that moving forward for other smaller clubs
and or branches without this voluntary
or monetary resources, um, won't be able to maintain
or establish club run shooting ranges,
which may have long term effects on public safety.
Uh, so just to conclude, our submission is, um, in, in line
with that made by the National Association,
that definitions relating to non pistols shooting clubs
and ranges are removed from section five
and that part five of the bill as it applies
to non pistols shooting clubs and ranges is removed.
Okay. We're gonna come back to the details, right.
Um, Mr. Scott Willis. Thank you, Tom.
Um, a note there
that you say you oppose the firearms registry.
Why on earth do you oppose the firearms registry when it's
there to ensure that we know where firearms are and,
and what firearms are out there?
What, what is, what is the, what is what's there to oppose?
So I, um, the, the point today for us was to,
to mainly talk about rangers
and I'd, I'd defer to some of the points that, um,
DW would've made in his national submission.
Um, on that specifically. Yeah, I'm not sure.
Um, where did you say, where you say, uh, it's here on, uh,
recognition of Club Armor England Registry.
Okay. Alright. Have you got,
do you wanna say any anymore on that or not?
Um, I, I, I direct to what, um,
has been put in natural submission about that.
Can I, can we just go back?
You and all the, um,
New Zealand Dearest Stalkers Association had the same thing
about getting rid of the regulations relating
to non pistols ranges.
You talked about all the costs and the regular.
Can you just be specific about now that you, well, now
that you've done it, is it, is it that much
of a hundreds going forward?
Because presumably all our ranges, 300
and something, whatever are, are of them, they've all been
through that process or were, they're about to go
through in 27, done, done
The three 30, I talked about pistol UN is a lot
more three 30.
So what, what, what's the issue now with, with the range,
uh, take the point that's really been invasive
and, you know, I remember that back in 2019, having
that conversation, but having now got through that stage,
are the, on what's so difficult
with the ongoing requirements of the non Pistols staff?
So for us specifically, it's not
so much the ongoing requirements.
The, the point being is that, um, you know,
we're reasonably well, well resourced club in terms
of financially and, and,
and the expertise we have available, um, for,
for smaller clubs and branches around the country
who might not necessarily have those resources, who want
to want to, um, maintain things
or other clubs that wanna set up their own shooting ranges.
Um, it's, it's a really burdensome sort of barrier to,
to people to doing that.
And what's a really burdensome, just take us
through the detail, the next level of detail.
What does that mean when you say, what are you gotta do
that's really difficult?
Well, so I mean it's the, the, the requirements
for certification and,
and, um, engaging with the, the inspectors and,
and having all that sort of inspection takes time.
You know, for example, when we,
we were going through, we were all volunteers.
We had to go meet with the shooting range inspection a
couple of times, take the afternoon off
work, all that sort of thing.
Um, and yeah, it's the, the, the time it takes away from
that, um, the cost for these,
these small branches which might not
have those resources available.
Um, there's lots of sort of nitty gritty things in,
in relation to the signage and sorry to, um,
and maybe, no, no, no.
But yeah, um, I'm just asking
because we're just trying
to understand exactly what we're saying.
So, you know, there's a proposal that's two and a half years
and some people recommend move to five year renewal of,
of range certification.
We obviously talked about the local government stuff,
but what, what more is there that
now having, having all, all ranges been through
that process apart from the new ones
that might come on board, given that everyone's gone
through the process, are the ongoing requirements
that significant, uh, not
for us now that we've been through it?
No. Okay.
So your, your comment
and all the talkers people, uh, submissions that is really
to deal with, uh, the costs associated
and the imposition it poses on new ranges being established.
Yes. And I guess with, with growing population,
growing interest in hunting and firearms, um, with,
without new ranges being available
and new clubs being able to have access to ranges,
it puts more pressure on those which are already
established, which, um, you know, we are starting
to experience in our club itself.
Yeah. Which just comes back, I mean,
it's in your submission, I think you made the comment.
So if yeah. Rangers can't be established, what do you,
what do you see as kind of the public safety outcomes?
Well, it's, um, it's,
it's gonna put more pressure on on
ranges, which are established.
Um, I mean, our range at the moment, it's, we have,
we have days that's really busy
and some people, you know, have limited time shooting.
Um, people might get fed up with that
and decide stuff that I'm gonna go do my own thing
and go shoot up a riverbed that
before you go hunting, whatever, which obviously is,
you know, um, serious public, um, public safety Yeah.
Implications. So, so people are gonna start, um, if,
if those ranges aren't available, people are gonna start,
um, doing the wrong thing and,
and citing rifles where they shouldn't be so well in,
in areas which aren't as safe and controlled.
Alright, cool. Um, thank you
for your submission this afternoon.
Cool. Um, very helpful.
We're about to hear from the, I'm sure, so that'd be useful.
But in the meantime, we've got the Sporting
Shooters Association of New Zealand
and Pea, Mr.
Hemp Hill. Is
It hemp?
Yeah. So another Tom, I apologize.
That's all right. Right.
So, um, I just thought I would very quickly cap, um,
clarify, uh, the, um, prohibited,
now restricted ammunition stuff.
Um, it's our understanding that
that's gonna be covered in regulations, um,
rather than in the act like, um, like
as if it's an endorsement for a prohibitive firearm.
So, um, that's why stuff is missing.
It's 'cause it hasn't been done yet. Right.
Um, so there's still a lot of regulation to do after this.
Okay. I wanna clarify that.
Um, we've actually touched on that in our submission as well
and other ways we could,
you could do it, which aren't in regs.
Um, but, um, yeah, first of all, apologies
for the hefty submission.
Um, I'm a bit about me is I'm, I'm the president
of the Sporting Shooters Association.
I've been the president for two and a half, three years now.
Um, I initially moved over to New Zealand
with my family in 2013, um,
and, um, was lucky enough to go
to a school which had a clay pigeon shooting team.
So, um, as fish and game as, um, alluded to,
and also Clay Pigeon is, um,
clay pigeon shooting was my way into the whole scene.
So I got my license when I was about 17
and, um, moved on from there.
I was one of the lucky few youngsters who was able to get a,
um, semi-automatic center fire rifle
before they were, uh, prohibited.
So I, I come from a very, very limited cohort of people
who are both young and had those types of firearms.
I had an M1 carbine, um, which is about the same
as a 3 57 magnum ballistically.
Um, alright, so, uh, take me through your, your big points.
So, um, our key points are mostly,
uh, standard firearms.
Um, we don't see why detachable magazine pump action
firearms are on prohibit, uh, treated the same as an AR 15.
They're not a semi-automatic firearms.
So why are they being treated the same?
Um, we still haven't found a compelling reason as
to why they were specifically reclassified back in the day.
Um, the reasons changed,
but none of 'em are very convincing on a technical basis.
Um, the other thing was, um,
labor actually coined this idea back in the early days up
to 2019 of having, uh, firearms
that had non detachable magazines, uh,
which were semi-automatic.
So much like we have, um, our current regime
with semi-automatic shotguns with tubular magazines.
Um, for a couple of weeks
after 2019, there was actually a regime for rifles
of similar configuration as well, which, uh, was amended.
Uh, we think that that would, should be brought back
because, uh, what makes a firearm dangerous is, is
the ability to keep it firing, which comes from the ease
to replenish ammunition in the magazine, as well as the, um,
ease in which you can actually get the firearm to fire.
Um, so we go over how we technically articulate threat
and, uh, and, and risk in our submission as well.
Um, and we even got an equation for it
as well for those who like numbers.
Um, the other, so, um, yeah, we're, we're very big on, um,
on a category or standard firearms, having fixed magazines,
semi-automatic firearms in general, not just shotguns, uh,
for center fire rim file.
We don't think there should be any changes there.
Um, another big change for standard firearms.
Um, having everything at 10 rounds
for magazine capacity, just keep it simple.
We still have people coming through the, uh,
the firearm safety authority right now trying
to register guns with 15 rounds.
Um, it is still a problem.
People still don't know that they have a pre
of firearm in their, in their safe
and it's a lever action, right?
Um, or a semi automatic 22.
Um, I even, I even know of people trying
to register actuals, semi-automatic ar um, not AR fifteens,
but semi-automatic center fire rifles with, um, that, uh,
hunting configuration because they were only going
after AR fifteens and AKs back in the day.
So the understanding of the current law is
orally articulation.
I think that comes down to the rapid changes that happened
after 2019, which, um, I think amounted to 16 amendments
and in one term,
and, um, a lot of regulatory changes in secondary alleged.
Um, the other thing is, um,
we are very big on the reinstatement of e category.
Um, people say it's a, you know, a a vocal minority.
Yes, it is a minority issue. What, sorry,
What the Category?
Um, 3 20 19. It was for, uh, the possession of N ssas.
Um, so it was semi-automatic center fire rifles
with magazine capacities over seven,
but, oh, um, so AR fifteens more or less, right.
So we believe that an e category equivalent today would be,
um, firearms that can accept a detachable magazine
that a semi automatic centier
or shotgun, um, which is distinct. And do you wanna
Bring that category back?
It was a minority group of people who owned
and used those firearms.
There were no offenses that came from them.
Um, we want to keep it as a minority, um,
but we don't think that they should be unfairly
penalized 'cause they did nothing wrong.
The issue came from the availability of a category, firearms
that can accept larger than a category magazines.
Um, and that was seen as a horse's bolted issue pre 2019.
Um, so the, so, um,
we already have these firearms in the country.
They're already owned by pest controls
and they're already owned by collectors.
Um, we're not necessarily wanting
to increase the amount of people who own this.
We want to have the people who currently own them be able
to use them, um,
because they're already vetted
to the high standard to possess them.
Alright. And what else do you got in here?
Um, we've also got, uh, pi pistol caliber car combines.
Yeah. Virtual virtually the same as a small semi pistol.
Yeah. Um, we define that.
Um, we also a really big thing, the, um, establishment
of clear and ob
and uh, uncontestable legitimization pathways
for gray market firearms.
It is incredibly important that, that,
So how do you propose that we should do that?
Um, well, currently having a
statutory pathway would be good,
But there's been many statutory pathways where, well,
Currently there isn't. Well, there's been,
But there's been a whole lot of amnesty of people.
Oh yeah. But, um, if you look at section 28 u
of the current Act, when that was replaced,
it created a black hole.
And I'm sure, um, other people have raised the issue
of tubular magazines
and, uh, when they're trying to register firearms, uh,
it's actually in here.
Um, the um, issue was that
if when it was repealed, it wasn't replaced with anything,
the firearm safety authority didn't feel comfortable.
'cause there was nothing to say you could or you couldn't.
And that led to a bunch of arbitrary outcomes.
I think a hundred people's firearms got destroyed
before there was a policy change.
And now there is a policy change that allows people
to basically modify a magazine capacity of an
otherwise a category firearm.
And then it's no issue. But it caused a massive
administrative issue, um,
because the, um, people were trying to register 15 round
rim fire firearms when the capacity was 10.
And the, uh,
firearm safety authority did not feel comfortable legally
allowing people to simply crimp a tube on a magazine
to make it only except 10 rims.
It was an administrative bumble, more or less. Okay.
Um, but yeah, we, we believe that, um, e category
with the appropriate and proportionate
safeguards can come back.
Um, we can already vet people up to the ability
to discharge machine guns in New Zealand.
That is in the current framework.
Um, we have the regulatory, uh,
the vetting capacity to vet for that.
So anything less than that is just political
and willingness rather than a practical impediment.
Um, so yeah, I appreciate that.
My submission is quite large on the solicitor,
so I redraft a lot of stuff.
Um, I can see that. I know you guys are short on time,
so I thought it would be good to actually provide you
with amendment proposals.
Um, you any questions?
Right. Who's got
A question? Just a quick, quick, um,
you shouldn't apologize
to link to your submission.
That's good. I mean, it's,
you sort of have all of that material.
Uh, I mean we, did you just talk about this kind of area of,
um, yeah, the gray, gray firearms
and trying to bring, one suggestion you had today was about
kind of dealers playing some role in that,
being able to turn up at a dealer.
Would you support that completely?
Okay. Um, the, the KPI here is guns on the books. Yeah.
If they're not on the books, we dunno where they are.
They're outside the regulation.
Um, it's, it should be a public safety imperative
that there is a legitimization pathway that allows
for the firearms to enter lawful circulation.
Now, if a firearm comes with, say, no serial number, bit
of a different story, but if you find a gun in your
grandpa's crawlspace from World War ii,
there shouldn't actually be any issues.
If you saying, Hey, I wanna legitimize this
and put it on the box, um,
it it's a blatant public safety win. And you like
The idea of dealers and museums being
the recipients of that or
What? I think anyone
has a suitable endorsement
to take on possess firearms.
That type should be fine. Um, and what
Sort of endorsement would you need for
That? Oh, it depends on
the type A gun.
Um, it could be a pistols could be a restricted
firearm, um, restricted weapon.
Um, yeah, as long as they're suitably qualified
to possess the firearm in question, I think
that there should be no real issue.
However, as was raised earlier, uh,
particularly in the regions, a lot
of firearms dealers don't hold the suitable
endorsements for say, pistols.
Like that's just not what they do.
Um, they're, they're all about selling techers and sarcos
and Ram Remingtons for deer hunter
because they're not really a pistol shooter kind of place.
Yeah. So there needs to be workarounds for that
and perhaps maybe a temporary, um, notification
to the authority, say seven days,
and then they have to find somebody or something like that.
But I, I think that we should not be making it hard
to have these firearms become legitimate.
Right. All right. Did you wanna ask
The question? Yeah. Um,
very quickly.
So the e category that you talked about, the cfi Yes.
Semi-automatic cfi, very small group of people
who actually want to use it except for pest control.
This doesn't seem to be a real, a really good reason to,
to promote the use of what are very, um,
lethal weapons if they fall into the wrong hands. So what,
So What would it give us some,
some reason why we think that should be a good idea?
Because, you know, I can't, I can't see any,
I I completely understand the perspective. Um,
That's certainly not for hunting for,
I mean, I use mine.
Um, so
You certainly need one shot, truly
Of I wanna shoot more than one.
Yeah. I dunno. It's, it's, I mean by that logic,
we wouldn't have double barrel shotguns
if you only need one shot.
Right. But the, the issue is that, um,
since 2019, a firearms regime has been used in a way
that says that firearms possessions is,
is a privilege not a right,
but it, it actually neglects to acknowledge that the people
who meet that standard are privileged
by being fit and proper people.
There's this whole issue of, uh, nobody needs X, Y, and Z.
It's not a need. It's the fact that we're fit, fit
and proper people and we should be able to do that.
We're not the common, we're not the
common unlicensed person.
So if there are proportionate safeguards, uh,
and there are proportionate, um, scrutiny, rigmarole, um,
as I've said before, we can vet people up to the ability
to fire machine guns in this country. So, okay.
That's, I guess we're not America either,
So. No, no, but the,
but the thing is, is that it's not
that it's logistically impossible
from a vetting perspective.
No. It's, it's more that it's a political unwillingness.
Mm-hmm. But, um, as a fit, as fit
and proper people, why would we be treated as anything less?
Alright. Hey, thank you for your comments today.
Thank you for your lengthy submission.
Um, you, you enjoyed yourself as a lawyer, we, we note Yeah.
And so thank you for your time.
Now, unfortunately, by Bury Small Ball rifle club,
which other, we're gonna have another crack with rifle club
lost power and West talking up.
Oh no. Gee. Stuff up there.
So, uh, we've got the New Zealand Law Association on board
what's happening in West Stock.
We are minute ahead of schedule now.
Gee, fantastic. Cheering. I think
We still agree.
It's got, you know, a long skinny line. Mm
Enough. Batterie. Hello?
Hello.
You're our last person today.
Oh, lucky last. Oh, I'm sure we're all
Okay. We've got 10 minutes.
Um, you've done this before, so
I have. So,
um, and thank you for this opportunity.
Um, as you know, my name is Elaine Ward.
Um, I'm here as you know, on behalf
of the Royal Association of New Zealand.
Um, we have well over seven
and a half thousand members across New Zealand, um,
in all areas of the law.
I'm part of the criminal law committee that, uh,
which is made up of, um, uh,
practicing criminal practitioners.
Um, we appear in firearm cases and related proceedings.
Um, and we see the real world effects of drafting choices
on investigation, uh, charges, bails,
evidence, disputes, um, sentencing and appeals.
Um, lemme start firstly by clearly stating
that we do support strong firearm regulation.
We support, um, public safety
and, um, obviously we also support Parliament ums
entitlement and required to reduce risk and prevent harm.
Our concern is not the objective of the bill.
Our concern is that, uh, the, some
of the mechanisms in the bill shift
all criminal justice protections
and do so more than, um, is reasonably necessary
to achieve the bill's aims.
Um, this matters
because firearm laws, um, sits right
at the boundary between, um, regulation
and criminal punishment.
When the law crosses that boundary, uh,
it must still respect basic architecture
of our criminal justice system.
So under section five of the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act,
act rights can be limited
for important objectives like public safety,
but limits must be justified and proportionate.
And in several ways we say
that the bill does not use the least
rights limiting option available.
And we've raised some of those, um,
issues in our submissions that we have filed.
I'm gonna cover about maybe six issues briefly,
but clearly I'm sure you would want to depart
after a long day of listening to submissions.
So I'll try and be concise.
Firstly, um, in the bill, we lose direct access, uh,
to the court for licensing decisions.
At the moment, if a firearms license is refused, revoked,
or conditions are imposed, the effective person can appeal
to the district court under our current legislation.
The bill removes that direct right
and places it with the review
by a firearm licensing the review committee.
This process is largely on the papers
that change is not just administrative licensing.
Decisions can have immediate and serious consequences.
Police may seize firearms straight away.
A person can be prevented from lawfully possessing items
they previously held.
The decision can expose a person
to criminal charges if they get it wrong.
It can affect employment, particularly for those
who work depends on licensing.
Where an executive decision carries consequences like that,
including criminal exposure.
Accessible, uh,
judicial oversight is a constitutional safeguard.
A paper only review is particularly risky when
credibility is an issue.
If the decision turns on who is telling the
need an oral hearing,
and you need the ability to test that evidence.
Here, the bill does make the court a second tier option,
which is sometimes cannot be affordable.
For some, our recommendation is straightforward.
Restore a direct writer of, of an appeal
to the district court on the merits guarantee.
Oral hearings where facts
or credibility are disputed, make it explicit
that all parties can call and test evidence
and that clear standards apply.
Secondly, the bill expands the definition of possession
to include access
and it introduces a deemed position effectively
presuming position.
Unless the accused can prove
otherwise position offenses are serious,
they can carry heavy penalties and long-term consequences.
Under established criminal law
position has two core elements, knowledge and control.
The bill risks shifting us away from that
and towards criminalizing proximity or shared spaces.
Here are some real life examples where this lands.
A flatmate could be prosecuted
because an item is in a shared garage
or cupboard, even if they didn't know it existed.
A driver could be presumed responsible
for something placed in the car by someone else
an occupier could to prove a negative
that they didn't know, which is exactly what presumption
of innocence is meant to protect against.
We understand the policy concerns.
People shouldn't be able to dodge liability
by claiming technical ignorance when they're in fact
exercising control.
But you can address that with a narrower, clearer definition
of constructive position focused on intentional control
rather than mere access.
We recommend keep the prosecution's burden
to prove knowledge and control beyond reasonable doubt.
Define constructive possession narrowly
and precisely remove mere access
as a sufficient basis for criminal liability.
Make it explicit that innocent proximity is
not criminal possession.
The next concern we have is
that the bill also includes reverse onus provisions
requiring defendants to pro approve a lawful purpose
that ints the structure of a criminal trial.
Our criminal process is built on a simple rule.
Prosecution proves guilt.
The defendant does not prove innocence.
Reverse onus causes increased conviction risk,
especially in the real world conditions we see every day
where records are missing
or not retained for long periods
where people cannot access documents quickly.
Where the pressure
of trial risks pushes people towards guilty plea,
reverse burdens should be rare,
tightly justified and drafted.
To minimize unfairness, our recommendation is
to place the burden back on the prosecution
to prove the absence of lawful purpose
and to include clear due diligence defenses.
Also, the bill imposes strict liability
and criminalizes administrative, um, mistakes.
It criminalizes notification, failures
and record keeping, uh, lapses.
Sometimes without requiring any intention
or recklessness, there is a real shift in the approach
and it carries real consequences.
Criminal conviction is not a mere compliance tool.
It carries stigma, affects reputation, travel, work,
and future licensing.
We are not saying compliance doesn't matter.
We are saying criminal convictions should be reserved
for criminal wrongdoing if the goal is better.
Compliance. A graduated approach is more proportionate.
Incorporating measures such as warnings
and education for first breaches, infringement notices
for lower level non-compliance prosecution
for intentional or reckless breaches,
or for conduct that creates real risk.
This is how you achieve compliance without unnecessary
loading the criminal courts
and creating disproportionate criminal records.
The bill expands information gathering powers without clear
use immunity information person is compelled to provide
for regulatory compliance.
This could later be used to prosecute them
that undermines the privilege against self-incrimination.
We recommend express use mini uh,
immunity protections clear drafting that compels
regulatory information cannot be used
in criminal proceedings.
Clear separation between compliance tools
and criminal investigation tools.
The bill contains unlimited prosecution exposure, broad
powers, and has a dis disproportionate impact.
Clause 2 8 2 re removes limitation periods,
periods across the spectrum
of offending unlimited prosecution exposure
and undermines fairness over time.
Evidence deteriorate deteriorates, witnesses disappear.
Records are lost and a defense becomes speculative.
Yeah, unlimited liability might be justified in cases
of serious public safety offenses.
It is disproportionate for regulatory breaches.
We recommend reinstating limitation periods
for non-serious offenses
and reserving longer timeframes
for generally serious offending.
Secondly, for forfeiture, forfeiture must be proportionate
and con connected to the wrongdoing.
The bill's, broad forfeiture powers are punitive
and are disconnected from culpability.
We recommend requiring a clear
and substantial connection to the offense.
A judicial proportionality assessment,
an explicit protection for innocent third parties.
The bill may also create systemic and e equality impacts.
The complex re uh, regulatory criminalization tends
to fall hardest on people with the least administrative
resources That can include rural, rural communities,
small operators, and people who lack the resources
to navigate complex com Compliance systems
criminal law should punish wrongdoing, not complexity.
To sum up our points, we support strong form, uh,
firearm regulations.
We support harm prevention and public safety.
But public safety does not require erosion
of constitutional safeguard.
The bill can preserve its protective purposes while
restoring alignment with long established
criminal justice principles.
In short, we ask the committee to amend the bill
so it still protects the public,
while also preserving the presumption of innocence,
effective and accessible judicial oversight, proportional
enforcement and fear criminal process.
Those are my submissions.
I'm sure it's been a long day. Yeah,
You've enjoyed it.
But all I can say is you've enjoyed yourself.
Yeah. Um, Now we've got Mr. Todd Stevenson.
It's been a long day, but no, very good submission.
Thank you. And obviously a lot of
detail in the written submission.
I just wanna challenge you on the
file alarms licensing review committee.
I, I, I totally understand the point you're making,
but I think others would say actually it's actually very,
uh, expensive, timely
and complex to go straight to a district court review.
As your submission acknowledges,
you can still end up in the district court
and you're basically reviewing the decision
of the Firearms Licensing Review committee.
I, I suppose I would just say, um,
do you not think there's still enough safeguards there
because you're not, again, as I said,
the judicial oversight does remain.
It's just at a different level.
And as I said, I think what it's been trying
to be achieved here is actually a more, um, a much quicker
and maybe more informed, um, review
of when a license isn't granted
And graduated And graduated.
So I just wanted to kind of see, yeah.
Is it quicker though when,
when you can go straight from getting your decision
to challenging what has been done on papers
to a district court through an oral hearing?
In my, um, experience,
and I've been in this criminal fear for 25 years, every sort
of, I wouldn't say roadblock,
but an impediment to that last barrier, which is the, uh,
triple jurisdictional court, such as, um, the, um,
independent body that you are saying is in, in
between the actual, you know, the review.
Um, it creates a longer period to get to that process.
Also more time
and money is spent to get to that, to that. Is there,
Is there another way process?
Isn't there another way? Because it's not,
I didn't think you had to sequentially go there.
There's a, you could go straight to district court
of V one challenge, but you've got a interim cheap step
to go through this licensing.
So if presumably you would be much more comfortable if at
the option of the person who is offended, um, you know,
decision goes against them, decisions being made against
them, uh, they could have at their choice either to go
to the licensee or they could go straight
to the district court, but it should be at their option.
Well, it would be great if it was an option available
to them to go straight to the district court.
Um, because if it's done on papers, you sort of, um,
if you wanna challenge in an oral hearing what's been placed
before, um, the decision maker, it would be great to have
that hearing and heard.
Because for example,
say if somebody was not given the license
because they're being charged being deemed to be, um,
um, related in some distant way to a gang member
and their license wasn't, um, wasn't given to them.
Now what sort of processes were in place?
What are, what information are you relying on An outdated
police sort of NIA system, which is completely wrong
and they don't have a basis to challenge that.
So those are information
that they could challenge at a district court.
What information are you relying on?
How did you arrive at that decision?
What were your witnesses?
I have witnesses that are in, in contrary to
what you relied on.
Okay. Alright. I think, um, that's very helpful.
Hey, any other questions from anyone Duncan? No.
Hey, thank you very much.
That's, and I've gotta a compliment to, unlike some lawyers,
you can write a lot of pages.
Actually the way that was laid out
was actually very, very helpful.
Mm. In a succinct manner with clear options and clear.
Thank you very much. Really appreciate that.
Thank you very much. Okay. Have a good evening.
Now I'm gonna have to ask you good people to
vacate the premises because we've gotta go
back into committee.
But thank you for your attendance today.
Thank you for the help from the side.